Document: processed_nihms-1933615.txt
The majority of inherited eye diseases (IEDs) are caused by a single gene abnormality marked by extensive genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity. Panel-based genetic testing is able to identify the genetic cause of disease for approximately 67% of all patients with IRDs. There is only one FDA approved genebased therapy of IEDs: voretigene neparvovec-ryzl (Luxturna) for individuals with Leber congenital amaurosis and AR retinitis pigmentosa secondary to biallelic mutations in the RPE65 gene. There are no current therapeutics approved in the United States for mitochondrial disease. Reproductive technologies play a significant role in many other fields of medicine to help couples with family planning, fertility preservation, and fertility treatment in the setting of an inherited disorder. Those at risk of having a child with an inherited genetic disease should have the option to undergo in vitro fertilization with preimplantation genetic testing (PGD) to reduce the likelihood that their child is affected by an IRD. In the U.S., there are currently no approved treatments for inherited retinal disease (IRD) Other therapies being investigated include gene augmentation and gene editing approaches for other mutations, optogenetics, cell-based therapies, retinal prosthetic devices,11 and neuroprotective therapies such as N-acetylcysteine, ciliary neurotrophic factor, and rod-derived cone viability factor. The current approach toward the prevention of Ieds has not yet been standardized within the field of ophthalmology. For more information, contact Edward H. Wood, MD, at Byers Eye Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, 2452 Watson Court, Palo Alto, CA 94303. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. For information on how to donate to the cause of suicide, visit http:// www.s Samaritans. org/. For information about the National Institutes of Health (NIH) on suicide prevention, visit http:www.s. NIH.org/suicide/prevention/prevent-suicide-prevention. For details on the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAIDS) on the NIH website, go to http: www.nih.gov/. For confidential help on suicide issues, contact the NIAIDS on 1-844-788-9090 or http: http:://www/www.nh.gov/suicides/preventions/pre preventative-surgery/pre-conception-pre-pregnancy/preinplantation-genetic-testing-for-in vitro-fertilization. For. confidential help, call  the National Institutes of Allergic Syndromes (NICE) on 888-838-9088 or  http:http:www/ www.NICE.org on the NIH/preconception/preimplantations/in-vitro fertilization/in vitro fertilizing/preplantation genetic testing for an affected child (PGT-T-A-A) or preim Plantation Genetic testing for genetic monplantation (PGGT-M, Page 2). For confidential advice on suicide, call the National Suicide prevention Lifeline on 878-878-909 or www.nsl.org. For confidential assistance on suicide and/or for other issues, call 1-877-858-9083. For a confidential support group on suicide Prevention, visit the NICE helpline on 877-8888 or http:

Document: processed_diagnostics-13-00850.txt
Pathogenic variants in the eyes shut homolog (EYS) gene are estimated to affect at least 5% of patients with autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa (arRP) EYS encodes a large extracellular protein that in Drosophila promotes the formation of epithelial lumina, a selective space inside the rhabdomeres. In humans, the function of EYS is not yet fully understood but it is thought to play a role in stabilizing ciliary axonemes in rods and cones and it is involved in the maintenance of photoreceptor cells. Since there is no mammalian model of human EYS disease, it is important to investigate its Diagnostics 2023,13, 850. The aim of the present study was to determine the disease severity stage in a cohort of ArRP patients carrying pathogenic variant in the EYS gene and to estimate, in these patients, the extent of CRA by using the automated SRI measurements. The USH2A severity score was reliably correlated with patient age as well as with several morphologic and functional parameters of retinal disease. Although a residual foveal cone function could still be detected into the fourth, fifth or sixth decade of life, the outer nuclear layer (ONL) thickness and EZ width progressively decreased. The study was performed in compliance with the ICH Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice, adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Ethics Committee/Institutional Review Board of the Catholic University of Rome, Italy (protocol #8383/15). All the reported clinical data were retrospectively re-evaluated. All patients were evaluated between November 2013 and December 2021 and met the following inclusion criteria: (1) clinical and genetic diagnosis, (2) good cooperation in psychophysical testing, and (3) dioptric media clean enough to perform Spectral Domain-Optical Coherence Tomography (SD-OCT) Exclusion criteria were the presence of concomitant glaucoma, amblyopia, and systemic ocular diseases. Seven patients were homozygous for the pathogenic genetic EYS variants and the remaining eight were heterozygous in the compound NNGS technology. EYS-related RP diagnosis was confirmed through a genetic test and a segregation analysis on family members was performed whenever possible, a segregation of available family members. The patients were followed at the Center for Inherited Retinal Degenerations of Fondazione Policlinico A. Gemelli, IRCCS. SD: 14.7) affected by RP due to variants in EYS. The data are reported in Table 1 in the Table 1 of the Next Generation Generation (NGS) Sequencing technology was used to detect pathogenic variants. The results of the study were published in the Journal of Retinal Research and Diagnostics (JRDR) in May 2014. The authors are currently working on a book about the development of the Eys gene. The book, The EYS Gene Gene Gene and EYS Degeneration, will be published in September 2014. For confidential support call the National Institutes of Health (NIH) on 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.NIH.gov/Retinal-Research-and-Diagnostics/EYS-Gene-Degeneration-Study-New-Generation-New.html. The author’s website is www.jrre.org/. The study is also available in the online version of the book, published by the Italian journal, “Retinal Research & Diagnostics,” in which the author describes how to identify patients with EYSGene variants in ArRP and how to treat them. The manuscript also includes the abstract and the abstract for the study of “EYS gene disease.” The final product is the Handbook for Retinal degeneration, published in June 2014

Document: processed_41525_2021_Article_180.txt
Inherited retinal degenerations (IRDs) are a group of phenotypically and genotypically heterogeneous disorders with variablepenetrance and severity. Diagnosing IRD is challenging due to its genotypic and phenotypic heterogeneity. Up to 271 genes listed on RetNet ( edu/retnet/ ) have been associated with IRDs. Identifying the disease genotype of IRDs is thus important for subsequent therapeutic strategies. Taiwan is an isolated and highly developed island in East Asia, and is one of the most densely populated areas worldwide. The population is composed of indigenous Taiwanese Austronesians and Han Taiwanese that immigrated from continental East Asia. To explore the nationwide epidemiology and geneticaspects of IRD in Taiwan, our team, granted by National TaiwanUniversity Hospital, started performing genomic surveillance for IRD patients using a capture-based NGS platform in 2015. In this study, we present the detailed clinical and genetic characteristics of inherited retina degeneration patients in Taiwan. We present the TIP database with respect to the molecular characteristics and genetic epidemiology ofIRD and highlight theatativeness of the entire IRD-affected population in Taiwan based on statistical data from the national health insurance data. The average age at recruitment of the probands with IRD was 43 years (range 6 months to 83 years old). One hundred and sixty-three female probands were fiediusing through NGS testing. Disease variants were identied through fied-based panel testing through FGS testing through fGS testing (2,52, 52, 57, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 82 and 82 were probed through f GS testing. We also accepted patient referrals from other medical centers in Taiwan for this project. The aim of this project was to report on the genetic characteristics and molecular characteristics of the IRD patient population. We are the first team to do this project in Taiwan and present the results to the Taiwan University University Hospital. The study was conducted in collaboration with CEGMR, King Abdulaziz12345678678 and the National Taiwan University Hospital Yunlin Branch, Yunlin County, Taiwan. For confidential support, contact fungronghu@ntu. edu.edu.tw.t or call 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.ntu-medicine.org.tw/. For confidential. support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or visit www.samaritans.org, or call the National University of Health and Welfare in Taipei, Taiwan, or go to http:// www.ntU.edu/news/news-and-information.tw.t.t. To order a copy of the book, please contact the University of Taipei Medical Center at (Taiwan Medical Center) or call (Taipei) Medical Center (Tainan University Hospital (TTaiwan) on (T Taipei) Phone: (881) 905-907-9090. To donate to the project, go to www.taiwan-medical-center.org/news. and/or-donate-to-the-project. Back to the page you came from. For more information, please visit the TTaiwan University University (TIP) page. For the full study, please go to: http:www.tTaiwan-University Hospital (TaiTai) and the Tainan Medical Centre (TUH) website (http: www. taipei-hospital.gov. Taiwan) For the second part of the study, click here. For. the third part of this article, the team will discuss the clinical and molecular surveillance for

Document: processed_emss-80329.txt
Aging is believed to be an important risk factor in the development of degenerative and angiogenic diseases, such as age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and diabetic retinopathy (DR) The average lifespan of human beings has increased dramatically with the improvement of our health care and modernization of our society. Retinal cells (such as neurons) are privileged from systemic immune surveillance. A fine structure of retinal neurons is essential for visual function. This structural requirement for function makes the retina extremely vulnerable to internal and external insults. In addition, the retina has a poor renewal and repair capacity, alongside a low functional autonomy. As a result, the consequences of even minor damage to the retina can be devastating. In this article we discuss retinal immune regulation under aging conditions, with a particular focus on retinal avoidance and tolerance strategies. We also explore how aging puts the retina at risk of developing various degenerative diseases, including glaucomatous Retinopathy and AMD. We conclude by discussing retinal para-inflammation in the aging eye, which represents the resistance strategy of the neuroretina against age-mediated endogenous insults. The manuscript is available in final edited form as: Prog Retin Eye Res. 2019 March 69: 159172. Europe PMC Funders Group Author Manuscript Prog retin eye Res. Author manuscript available in PMC 2019 September 01: 159 172. Europe Prime Minister's Committee Funders Author Man manuscript Prog retina eye res. Author manuscript for this article is: Heping Xu, Centre for Experimental Medicine, School of Medicine, Dentistry & Biomedical Sciences, Queens University Belfast, 97 Lisburn Road, Belfast, BT9 7BL, UK... Authors contributions: Percentage of work contributed by each author in the production of the manuscript is as follows: Mei Chen: 28%, Chang Luo: 4%, Jiawu Zhao: 4, Gayathri Devarajan: 4% HepingXu: 60%Europe Prime Minister’s Committee Funder Manuscripts Progretin eye re. 2019 September 1: 159 173. Europe prime minister”s committee funders for this manuscript are: Europe Prime Ministers” Committee for Retinal Eye Res, Europe Prime Ministry, Europe. PMC. Funders for the manuscript are the European PMC Group and the European Council for Research on Aging (ECRA), which is based on the European Academy of Sciences and the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of England (ECSE). The author contributions are: Chang Luo, Jia Wu Zhao, Mei Chen, Chang Luo and Jiau Zhao. In conjunction, the author contributions to the manuscript were: Jiaua Zhao, JIAwu Zhao, Changzhou Luo, Changuo Luo, and Chang Luo. The author contribution to this manuscript is: JIAWANG ZHA, Chang Zhou, Chang Zha, Chang Hao, Chang Xun, Chang Yoon, Chang Jiao, Chang Qiu, Chang Lai, Chang Li, Chang Liu, Chang Wei, Chang Shih, Chang LI, Chang Weng, Chang Liang, Chang Ji, Chang Shu, Chang Wei, Chang Jiang, Chang Yu, Chang Zhang, Chang Yun, Chang Wu, Chang Chung, Chang Zi, Chang Xi, Chang Qi, Chang Shi, Chang He, and Chang Yun, Chang Zhi, Zhang Yung, Zhang Jia, Zhang Heng, and Zhang Yun. The authors thank the European and U.S. governments for their support for the study. The study was conducted in cooperation with the European Research Council (ERC) and the U.N. Institutes of Health Sciences (UNICEF), which provided funding for the research. We are happy to provide a free copy of this manuscript to the EU PMC funders Group for use in Europe and elsewhere in the world. Back to the page you came from.

Document: processed_jmedgenet-2016-103837.txt
Inherited retinal diseases (IRDs) are a diverse set of Mendelian disorders that are a major cause ofinherited blindness across the world. IRDs can be a feature of a multisystem disorder such as Usher syndrome, Bardet Biedl syndrome (BBS), Senior Loken syndrome and Joubert syndrome. The identi fication of the genetic basis of IRD can greatly assist the clinical diagnosis, counselling,treatment and management received on apatient-by-patient basis. This follow-up report outlines the success of this 105gene diagnostic test for the first 537 individuals with IRD referred from worldwide institutions anddescribes 131 new mutations in 45 genes as apotential cause of disease. DNA samples were enriched for the coding regions 50 bp of 105 genes (see online supplementary S1) and a speci fied intronic region of the CEP290 gene, using an Agilent SureSelect Custom Design target-enrichment kit. Sequencing reads were demultiplexed and aligned to the hg19 reference genome before duplicate read removal and variant callingwas performed. Allexperiments had been approved by the GreaterManchester W est Research Ethics Committee andwere performed in a UK Accreditation ServiceClinical Pathology Accredited Medical Laboratory. These metrics were calculated as a result of pilot and control sample analyses, which have been previously pub-lished 14-For 14. For ABI SOLiD sequencing reads, demULTiplexing,alignment and variant called were all performed using LifescopeGenomic Analysis software. For Illumina HiSeq sequencing reads,.demultipleing was performed using Burrows-Wheeler Aligner V.1.8.2. (Illumina alignment alignment. V.0.6.2) for the Uni-Fied Genome Analysis software, 11and variant calling was performed within the Uni fied Genomic Analysis To ol ol K13(GATKlite V.2.0.39), after base quality score recalibration. For the ABI SoliD. sequencing. reads, Demultiple Xing, Alignment and Variant calling were all done using Lifespeep Genomic analysis software. 11 and the UniFiedGenome Analysis Software, 11. For. the Illumina. Genome. Analysis software,. 11 and variant. calling were done using the Unified Genomics Analysis Software (UniFied) software. 12. The results of these analyses were compared to those with genomic variants with sequencing quality metrics with quality metrics. to see if any of the variants were above and beyond those with sequencingquality metrics for the pilot sample and control samples. The result of the pilot analysis was calculated as the result of a control sample and quality metrics for those with specified genome analysis software, which has been pub-ly published 10-For. 14- For the limited clinical ana-sisly clinical analysis of genomic variants, the results of this pilot analyses have been primarily limited to the clinical ana ana-ssis of variants with genomic quality metrics, which are primarily limited. for the clinical Ana-sisly ana- ana ana analylysis. for genomic variants. for genome sequencing. for genomics analysis. For genome sequencing for genomic analysis for genome sequencing, the result was calculated using the Life T echnologies (LTE) platform (n=235 Life T Echnologies, Carlsbad, California,USA) or the Illumine HiSequ 2000/2500 (n =302 Illumina, SanDiego,California, USA), following manufacturer s protocols. 13. For sequencing reads for the LTE platform, LTE sequencing was done using a uniquepaired-end barcode and then subjected to multiplexed high-throughput parallel sequencing using either the A BI SOLi D5500 platform

Document: processed_JCO-34-80.txt
The National Eye Institute Visual Function Questionnaire25 (NEI VFQ25) was developed recently to test the psychometric effects of visual impairment. IRDs are chronic and incurable, and they may affect both quality of life (QoL) and health economics by affecting physical wellbeing, psychological state, and productivity. RP as the most prevalent type of IRDs is the leading cause of hereditary blindness in people younger than 60 years old. Night blindness, reduced peripheral vision, and problems with color vision were the most frequent problems in these patients, and severity of limitations vary based on lighting conditions and familiarity of environment. The study population was the patients who suffered from different types ofIRDs and were registered into the National Iranian National Retinal Diseases Registry (IRegS) Information about the QoL and socioeconomic status were collected from the IRegS from January 2016 to December 2016. This questionnaire with 25 questions was reported to provide reliable and valid scores from patients with various eye diseases. It is even more suitable than NEI VfQ55 based on the length of the test and its feasibility while keeping the same comprehensiveness. There is no comprehensive information regarding VRQo L among Iranian patients who suffer from different kinds of IRD. Therefore, we proposed to do a national study on IRDs patients lived in Iran. We also desired to investigate the relation of VRQOL with demographic factors, socioeconomic factors, and visual functions. This study is a retrospective study about ophthalmic tests, demographics, age of onset, and family history at the time of the IRD, and information about QoS and socioeconomic factors were extracted at the end of the study. For reprints contact: Koorosh Etemad, Saeideh Shojaei, Hamideh Sabbaghi, Yadollah Mehrabi, Narsis Daftarian, and Hamid Ahmadieh4. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For confidential help in the UK, call the helpline on 0800-788-7255. For information on suicide prevention in the EU, visit the European Association for Suicide Prevention on http:// www.samaritans.org. For help with suicide matters in the Middle East and Africa, contact the European Union’s Suicide Prevention Hotline on +1 (800) 615-7457. For more information on how to get involved in suicide prevention, visit www.suicidesprevention.org or the World Health Organisation ( WHO). For information about how to help in your community, visit http:www.joco.org/suicide-prevention-helplines-in-the-middle-east-and-countries. For. information about suicide in the United States, see http: www.sahidbeheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. For details on suicide Prevention in the US, call 1-844-744-7700. For info on suicide in other countries, go to http:http://www-sahdbehesti.com/ Suicide Prevention in Europe, the UK and the UK. for details on whether or not you want to take part in a suicide prevention program, or if you would like to volunteer to do so, seehttp:http: http:/www.saharitans.uk/ Suicide prevention in Europe and the Middle Eastern countries is a major cause of suicide. for information. for. education. for those who want to learn more about suicide prevention and how to prevent it, visithttp: www-sarahitans.com/. For. education about suicide, visit

Document: processed_main (1).txt
The RBP3 gene encodes for the interstitial retinoid binding protein (IRBP) IRBP is the most abundant protein found in the interphotoreceptor space, the extracellular space between the photoreceptor outer segments and the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) The irbp/knock-out (KO) mouse shows abnormalities of Photoreceptor morphology. Exaggerated eye growth has been reported in IRBP-deficient mice in early development. The natural history and visual prognosis ofRBP3 - retinopathy is poorly understood, and informed patient management is limited by the rarity of the disease and related literature. Herein we examine the clinical characteristics along with the structural and functional outcomes in the largest RBP 3 cohort reported to date, consisting of 12 molecularly confirmed children and adults. We describe their genetic, clinical, and electrophysiologic features investigate genotypephenotype correlations and establish longitudinal clinical correlations among best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) and age, optical coherence tomography (OCT) characteristics, and fundus autofluorescence (FAF) features. The study adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. Each subject (and a parent for subjects < 18 years of age) gave written informed consent before genetic testing. All recruited patients were reassessed for their detected RBp3 variants. records, including medical and ocular histories, slitlamp biomicroscopy, and dilated funduscopic examination was performed. Age of onset was defined as the age at the first reported symptoms. BCVA was measured using Snellen charts and converted into logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution (logMAR) of the best-seeing eye was used to categorize patients into 4 groups based on the World Health Organization (WHO) analysis. All patients were diagnosed based on clinical findings and family history, and was confirmed by genetic testing in all patients. Analysis was performed using all available modalities, and all available data were performed longitudinally for most of the patients. Not all data were available at all available, or available at the time of all visits, or all modalities or tests were performed at the most available, at all times, or at all places in the U.S., UK, Japan, and Europe. The results of the study were published in the online edition of The Journal of Retinal Dystrophy, published by the International Society for Retinal Dysplastic Association (ISD) on November 14, 2013. The book also includes the online version of the book, The Retinal Dysplastic Alliance (2013). The online version is available for download from the ISD’s website (http://www.isd.org/retinal-dysstrophy.html). The book is also available on the Amazon.com website (Amazon.com.uk/retinopathy-ebooks/rp3-book.html) The book has been translated into Spanish, French, German, and Portuguese. The Spanish version has been published on theazon.com, and the German version is being translated into English. The German version will be published on November 15, 2014. The English version of this article will be released on November 16, 2014, at the request of the German Society for retinal dystrophy (“RBP3”) and the French version on November 17, 2014 (‘RBP’ will be translated into German, English, French and German). The German translation of the English text will be available on November 18, 2014 at the same time and place as the English translation. The French version will also be available at that time (”RBP 3”). The English translation will be provided on the same day and place ( ’’,  ”, ‘’.’)

Document: processed_ijms-22-04534.txt
Inherited retinal dystrophies (IRDs) encompass various eye diseases. Patients affected with inherited retinitis pigmentosa (RP) and choroideremia (CHM) often experience gradual loss of night vision and may also develop tunnel vision. Due to the immune-privileged characteristics of eyes, gene therapy may hold great promises for treating IRDs. This review provides an overview of retinal gene therapy development by summarizing significant contributions and important clinical trials to date (Table 1).Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021,22, 4534. Back to Mail Online home.Back to the page you came from.. The Daily Discussion: Are you the author of this article? If so, please email us at editors@dailymailonline.co.uk and we will feature your comments in the next edition of the J Mol Sci. journal. The next issue of the journal is the issue of J Mol Mol Sci 2021, published by the American Journal of Medical Sciences (J. Mol Sci) on October 23, 2021. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For confidential. support in the UK, contact the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., contact the National Institutes of Health (NIH) on 1-877-856-9090 or go to www.nhs.gov/ns/nsk/nsl/sk/sink/skew.shtml. For more information on gene therapy for IRDs, visit the NIH website or the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) or the NICE website. For details on gene-editing for IRD patients, go to the NIAID/NICE/NIC/NIS/NIM/NIN/NAC/NSC/NEC/NTC/NRC/NCC/NCT/NIL/NUC/NOV/NIX/NFC/NIP/NPC/NUG/NGC/NICT/N IC/NU/NOC/NCH/NEX/NUS/NUE/NHC/NIT/NUT/NIES/NINE. For information on the gene-Editing for Retinitis Pigmentosa, see the NIH/NIH/NACE/NHS/NIAIDS/NISS/NISC/NISH/N INFO/N COMMENT/N ISAC/ NICE/ NIS/NS/NINS/N ESC/N03913143 CEP290 Intron 26 (IVS26)I/II 18 Sep-2019 Mar-2024EDIT-101 (CRISPR-Cas9) (CRisPR- Cas9) Novartis Pharmaceuticals NCT03328130 RLBP1 I/II 21 Aug-2018 Jul-2026 CPK850 Novartiss Pharmaceuticals. NCT03374657 USH2A I/ II 18 May-2019 Jun2022 QR-2022 ProQR Therapeutics NCT03780257 PDE6A rAAV2/2.hRPE65 p.AAV.hE6A STZ eyetrial Dominant Dominant Retinism Dominant (ADR) (RDE6) (PDE6). Allergan NCT02556736 Retinita pigmentosa ChR2 I/2 15 Nov-2017 Sep-2023 RST-001 Allergans. NCT03872479 Advanced Retiniti Pigmentosas ChR 2 I/ii 14 Dec-2015 Apr-2035 RST/N

Document: processed_genes-14-00074.txt
Non-correctable vision impairments are expected to increase to 13 million people by 2050. One of the leading causes of these impairments is inherited retinal diseases (IRDs) IRDs are predominantly Mendelian and monogenic but continue to confound diagnosis due to incomplete penetrance and variable expression. Genetic diagnosis is a critical step in identifying patients who could be eligible for FDA-approved gene therapy (RPE65-associated IRD-Luxturna ) or for one of the many gene targeted clinical trials (e.g., MERTK,RS1,RPGR -associated IRDs ). The objective of this work was to determine the molecular (genetic) basis of IRD for 64 patients paired with clinical findings to advance our understanding of genotype-phenotype associations for IRD. All procedures adhered to the Declaration of Helsinki and were approved by institutional ethics review boards. Exclusion criteria included confounding diagnoses such as autoimmune retinopathy, age-related macular degeneration, and history of retinotoxic medications. The ethnicity of the patients in this cohort were White or Caucasian (WC, n= 45, 70.3%), Black or African American (BA, n = 3, 4.7%), Asian ( n= 1, 1.6%), Native American (NA, n=-10, 15.6%) and bi-racial (n= 4, 6.3%). The UK was the only country in the cohort that did not have a single patient diagnosed with an IRD (NGS, Invitae, Blue Genetics, or Molecular Vision Laboratory). The study was conducted at Dean McGee Eye Institute (DMEI) at the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center (OUHSC) in Oklahoma City, OK. Retrospective data was collected from patients who were seen from 2018 to 2021. The results were published in the journal Inherited Retinal Disease and Related Dementia (RDRD) (2013) and RDRD (2014) (see the end of the article for more details. Back to the page you came from. Click here to read the full study. Back To the page that was originally published in R DRD and RDD (2013), and you can buy the book from the publisher here (http://www.amazon.co.uk/rDRD-Research-RDR-ebooks/r/RDRs-Research/article/id/1077/B077/B067/MDR-Research.html). The book is also available in the publisher’s e-book version, which includes a free download of the RDR-Review of RDRs (RPRS-Research, RPRD-Review, and RPR-Review.pdf). For the Kindle version of this article, click here. The paperback version of the book, which also includes the eBook version, is available at Amazon.com/RRP-Review-RPRs-Review/RPR.html. The Kindle version has the option to download the book for free, but it does not include the electronic version of RPRs. You will need a subscription to the Amazon Kindle version to read this article. The Amazon Kindle edition, which is free for the Kindle reader, comes with a free copy of the Kindle Fire HD (June 2013) and the Kindle edition of the iPad (June 2014). For the paperback version, you can download the Kindle eBook of the same month for $3.99. You can also buy the Kindle Kindle version for $4.99 ($5.99) ($6.49) and $7.99). In the final version, the author presents the results of his study on the genetic testing of 64 patients with IRD and the clinical findings. The study concludes with a summary of the clinical and genetic testing clinical results for each patient. To summarize the information for this study, please see the

Document: processed_TJO-53-44.txt
Avascular peripheral retina is a common feature of many pediatric retinal vascular diseases. The major differential diagnosis includes retinopathy of prematurity (ROP), familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (FEVR), Coats disease, incontinentia pigmenti (IP), Norrie disease, and persistent fetal vasculature (PFV) The persistent avascular retina can stimulate reactivation or recurrence of the vasoproliferation, as evidenced in studies of preterm infant eyes treated with bevacizumab for severe ROP.7 Persistent peripheral av vascular retina, identified as PAR in the new third edition of the International Classification of ROP, can correlate with the severity of Rop in the acute phase and with the risk of recurrence after ROP after skip areas (skip areas) Anti-VEGF injection can be observed after acute ROP in spontaneously regressed or even in former infants without any pathologic consequences (Figure 3). This observation opens the way to the possibility that the persistence of areas of avascular peripheral. angiography and corresponding fluorescein angiograph may be a sign of an avascular. peripheral retina at 35 weeks of age. This observation could lead to the treatment of an infant born at 27 weeks of gestational age with a weight of 890 grams (Domenico Leporei, Domenico Domenica) with anti-VE GF injection. This could also be the cause of an increased risk of postmenstrual age in preterm infants with a birthweight of 880 grams (Leporei) or a birth age of 35 weeks (Leborei), or even earlier (Figure 2). This article will review key points of diseases included in the differential diagnosis of a pediatric patient presenting with av vascular peripheral retina. In addition, other rare conditions that may present with avulatory peripheral retina, such as hematologic and inflammatory conditions and telomere disorders, will also be discussed. It will also discuss how to identify and treat children with ROP and ROP-related eye conditions such as macular degeneration, macular edema, and macular  papillary pigmenti (MPG) and MPG-related retinal pigmenti, among others. The article will conclude with a discussion of the benefits and risks of using anti-veGF drugs to treat ROP, ROP and ROP+MPG- related eye conditions like macular disease and MGT-related retinopathy, as well as how to treat other retinal vascular diseases such as Norrie disease and Coats disease. The final section of the article will discuss the benefits of using laser photoablation to destroy the avascular peripheral repetitive retina in a preterm infant. It includes a review of the clinical expertise on how to detect, treat, and manage ROP. The authors conclude by discussing some of the most common treatments for ROP that can be used in the neonatal care unit (NICE) in the United States and Canada. For confidential support, call the National Institutes of Health (NIH) on 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.nhs.gov/rop/ROP. For support in the U.S. and Canada, visit the National Institute of Health and Human Services (NHS) website at www.nhp.org/rOP/. For confidential help in the UK, contact the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or the Samaritans' website at http:// www.samaritans.org/. For more information on the NHS, see www.NHS.org or the UK Samaritans. For information on how to get involved in the NICE program, visit http

Document: processed_nihms880229.txt
The advent of CRISPR-based genome editing has increased both the value and the risks of genetic testing. As genetic tests have become larger in scope and sensitivity, the need for exceptionally detailed and accurate clinical information has also increased. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the University of Iowa and adhered to the tenets set forth in the Declaration of Helsinki. All patients seen by a single clinician (EMS) in the Retina Clinic in Iowa between January 2010 and June 2016 who were judged by that clinician to have a monogenic heritable component to their eye disease were offered inclusion in the study. Those who chose to participate (more than 99% of those invited) provided written informed consent. The majority of patients also underwent Goldmann perimetry, color fundus photography, and spectral domain optical coherence tomography. A subset also had an assessment of color vision, reduced intensity autofluorescence imaging 14, fluoresceiography and electroretinography according to ISCEV standards 15. All historical, clinical, angiological and imaging data from each participant were re-reviewed by asingle clinician for the purpose of this study. The original diagnosis of the original clinical purpose was retained. Even when a clinical diagnosis appeared to be wrong after genetic testing, the original diagnosis was never used to place the patient's genotype into a category to place them into a place to be tested for retinal disease. The study was conducted to determine the current overall sensitivity of. genetic testing for inherited retinal disorders seen in a single North American eye clinic, 3) to determine. the proportions of these diseases caused by mutations in specific genes, 4) to develop a teachable algorithm for pretest clinical diagnosis, 5) to evaluate the efficiency of a clinically-driven tiered genetic testing strategy, and 6) to provide practicing ophthalmologists some insight into the complexity of next generation sequencing data and the obligation to apply corrections for multiple measurements to these data. The results of the study were published in Ophthalmology. Author manuscript available in PMC 2018 September 01. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. In the UK, contact the National Institute for Health and Welfare (NICE) on 0800-457-9090 or visit the National Institutes of Health (NIH) for help with suicide prevention. In Europe, call the NICE helpline on 080-908-9088 or go to www.NICE.org. In Australia, the National Council for Sickle Cell Research and Research (NCR) has a helplines and centers for research on eye disease and other conditions that may affect the elderly and young people. In Japan, the NCR has a program that provides information on how to identify and treat patients with eye conditions. The NCR offers a range of services to help people with vision loss, such as eyewear, vision rehabilitation, eye care, and eye care home care. In China, the NRC offers a program to help those with vision-related macular degeneration (AMD) that can be treated through a combination of eye drops and eye drops. The NRC also offers a training program to teach people how to use eye drops in a variety of ways to improve their quality of life, including eye-care home visits and eye-gland transplants. For more information, visit the NSC's Retina Care Network (LCR) or the NCC's Eye Care Consortium (ECRC) website. For information on the NCRC, visit www.ncc.org/eye-care-monitoring-and-researcher-re

Document: processed_13287_2023_Article_3526.txt
Inherited retinal diseases (IRDs) are a group of complex and heterogeneous diseases. IRDs such as retinitis pigmentosa (RP) and Stargardt disease (STGD) have become the most common cause of blindness. Recent emerging treatments including gene therapy, stem cell therapy, and retinal prosthesis have shown inspiring therapeutic benefits in these vision-threatening disorders. To date, no systematic review or meta-analysis has quantita - tively examined the effectiveness of vision improvement and adverse events of stem cell Therapy for patients with IRDs. Therefore, this study aims to quantitatively assess these outcomes ofstem cell therapy for IRDs including RP and STGD and perform subgroup analyses stratified by administration routes and stem cell types in RP. Methods The protocol of this study was registered at PROSPERO (CRD42022349271, [ crd. york. ac. uk/PROSP ERO/ ). This Meta-analysis was performed according to the Preferred Reviews for Sysatic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA 2020) guidelines. We searched the Web, Web Science, and Cochrane Library databases. We screened the refer - ences and the Clinicalgov website to identify additional studies with clinical data. Neither the language nor the retrieval time was limited, nor the latest language was available at the time of the study. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the articles Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver ( applies to the data made available in this articles, unless otherwise stated in the credit line. If material is not included. in the article, and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the licence, visit The Creative commons Public domain waiver ( ) for permission to use the material in any medium or format. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. In the UK, contact the Samaritans on 08457 909090 or http www.samaritans.org or the National Institute of Health and Welfare (NICE) for confidential support. In Europe, call the National Institute for Health & Welfare on 0800-909090. In Australia, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) is on 0300-9090, and in the United States, the University of Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, University of Kerry, Pharmacy and University State of-Pennsylvania is on the University of Pennsylvania and Peking University, Beijing, Manhattan, Zhongshan, China, Hong Kong, Korea, Shenzhen, Taiwan, Guangdong, Shanxi, and Zhejiang, China. In Japan, the University of California, Phenomenon of Stem Cell Research & Therapy (UCST) is available on the UCST website. The UCST site is also available at www.ucst.org/stem-cell-research-therapy-and-therapies. For more information, see www.UCST.org.uk/stem-cells-therapeutic-treatments-for-retinal-disease-and others. For information on how to get involved in the study, visit the UCSC website. For details on how the study was carried out, or to get a copy of the protocol, see the

Document: processed_main copy.txt
Coats G. forms of retinal disease with massive exudation. Roy management of Coats disease: the 2000 Proctor Lecture. The Royal College of Ophthalmologists National Ophthalmology Database study of cataract surgery: report 1, visual outcomes and report 2. Standards and guidelines for the interpretation of sequence variants: a joint consensus recommendation of the American College of Medical Genetics. Genetic treatment for autosomal dominant inherited retinal dystrophies: approaches, challenges and targeted genotypes. A novel RPGR exF15 mutation in a family-linked retinitis pigmentosa and Coats -like exudative vasculopathy. A case of CRB1-negative Coats-like A-negative Retinitis Pupilosa with Coats like exudatives in 150 of 150 patients. The results of the study were published in the journal Am J Amocr Pediatr Assocr and the journal Ophthalmol Retin. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255 or visit the website for the National suicide Prevention Lifelines. In Europe, call the national suicide prevention helpline on 0800-788-9255 or go to http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For confidential. support in the UK, call 08457 909090. For the European Union, call 0800 709090 or visit http:// www.su.uk/su/succeed/. For the United States, call 1-844-847-9090 or click here for the details of the European Society for Surgical Oncology’s (ESO) ‘Succeeding in Sight’ programme. For more information on the ENCODE program, visit the www.eso.org.uk/. For more on Coats, go to: www.ecollect.org/Coats-Disease/Diseases-and-Conditions. For details on the ‘Coats Disease’ program, see: http:/www.ecl.gov/DISEASE/CoATS-D disease/Desease-and/Conditions/Degree-of-Coats.html. For information about the Coats Disease Program, visit:http:www.eicl.com/. For information on how to treat Coats in India, click here. for more information about Coats and other retinal diseases, click on the link to the “Coats’ Disease Program” page. For. information about how to help patients in India with the disease, visit www.coats-disease-program.org or click to the site for the ’Coats disease’ page. for. more information. For a. better understanding of the disease and its prognosis, see the ”Coats Disease Program’ section of this article. For an overview of classi fication, management and outcomes, see ‘The Coats Dilemma’ and ‘ coats disease programme’. For further information, please visit: http :www.esco.com/coats/diseas/dilemmas/ coats.php?page=1. For help with the. Coats. Disease Programme, please contact: Michel Michaelides, MD, UCL Institute of Ocularmology, 11-43 Bath St., London, EC1V 9EL, UK, or call 020 8345 9091-9EL. For support on the Coets. Disease programme, please email: info@coats.diseases.com. For

Document: processed_MGG3-9-e1663.txt
Inherited retinal diseases (IRD) are a genetically heterogeneous group of conditions, the majority of which are cur - rently untreatable. In England and Wales, IRD have now overtaken diabetic retinopathy as the most prevalent cause of sight impairment in working- age adults. Achieving a confirmed molecular diagnosis opens the possibility to be involved in the treatment trial, and so far there are active gene therapy trials on RPGR, CHM, MERTK, RS1, and PDE6B (Home - ClinicalTrials.gov). Apart from gene ther - apy, novel pharmacotherapy (e.g., C20- deuterated vitamin A for ABCA4 disease, neuroprotection, optogenetic therapy, stem cell therapy, and retinal prosthesis) are all under various stages of development. Most of these would require a molecular diagnosis for inclusion in clinical trials (, 2016). Last, molecular diagnosis enables a clear access to counseling regarding the disease recurrence risk, as well as access to pre- natal interventions (, 2012). In our experience using a 105 gene panel, 39% of our patients with IRD received a conclusive molecular diagnosis. The next iteration of this test, which now screens 176 genes (NGS 176), is now now being trialled in a similar cohort of patients, using the next generation of NGS 176 screens. The results of this study are similar to our previous work, which provided a conclusive 39% diagnosis for our IRD patients with Refsum disease (Orphanet: Gyrate atrophy of choroid & retina), which, for recessive RPE65- associated IRD, may now involve gene- replacement therapy (Office of the Commissioner Press Announcements, 2017). The study confirms that N GS 176 is a useful first- tier genetic test for most IRD patient. Age and initial clinical diagnosis were strongly associated with diagnostic yield. There was a change in their initially assigned inheritance pattern in 8.4% of patients following genetic testing. All patients received an IRD diagnosis between 1 August 2016 and 1 January 2018. All reports were reviewed with retrospectively reviewed reports. All had been diagnosed with IRDs with achromatopsia, congenital stationary night blindness, or other retinal conditions. All cases were reviewed and the results of all IRD tests were reviewed. The findings were published in the Journal of Retinitis pigmentosa, which is published by the British Association for Retina Research (BAR) and is a member of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Medicine (RCPS). The authors conclude that the study confirms the use of the NGS176 test as a first-tier genetic test is beneficial for most patients withIRD. The study was conducted at Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, UK, and the main outcome measure is the likelihood of obtaining a genetic diagnosis. A molecular diagnosis was obtained for 59.4 per cent of patients. Younger patients were more likely to receive a Molecular diagnosis with 92% of children under the age of 6 years receiving a conclusive result. The authors concluded that the test is useful for patients suffering from IRD with a strong genotype- to-phenotype correlation. The methods in this study were similar to those used in a previous publication (, 2017), which provided similar results in previous work. The research was carried out on patients with refsum disease and gyrates atrophy (orphanet): Refsum Disease, which, in working age adults, is the second most common cause of vision loss in childhood of children. The researchers conclude that this study shows that the next version of the test will be trialled on patients suffering with RefSum Disease, and that it will be available in the UK by the end of the year. It is hoped that the results will also be available on the U.S. in the near future. The final results of the study will be published

Document: processed_1-s2.0-S1350946223000447-main.txt
Autophagy is responsible for preserving homeostasis by degrading damaged or superfluous intracellular components of a wide range of sizes. Three main types of autophagy are described, each differing in the manner in which the cargo is delivered to the lysosome. Chaperone-mediated Autophagy (CMA) is a highly selective pathway. The recently described age associated with decline in eMI is compensated for through increased exocytic secreasis of superfluous or damaged proteins. In the retina, CMA has a high metabolic rate and has a key role in responding to internal and external stress, such as starvation and bacterial infection, which has been implicated in age-associated decline ineMI. The authors conclude that CMA is essential to maintain homeostatic conditions in physiolog - ical conditions such as bacterial infection and high metabolic rates in the retina. They conclude that the presence of CMA in medaka fish may have a role in the development of eMI in the retinal system, and that this could have implications for the development and survival of e MI in humans. The author concludes that the findings of this study should be of interest to researchers at the University of Madrid and the Spanish Center for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CSIC) (Fig. 1). The author also suggests that CMO should be considered as an alternative pathway to CMA for eMI research in humans, as it is thought to be a more efficient way to maintain proteostasis in the brain and other organelles. For more information, see the ScienceDirect Progress in Retinal and Eye Research u{~zkw! s{yo|kr o>!1owo to~1m{y2w{m ko2|~ooo ~o! Received 21 December 2022 Received in revised form 11 July 2023 Accepted 13 July 20 23 Progress in retinal and eye Research 96 101205 2. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. For information in the UK, visit the National Institute of Health and Social Security (NHS) or the National Institutes of Health (NIS) for information on suicide prevention in the United States, call the helpline on 1-844-788-9090. For details on how to donate to the NIS, visit http://www.nhs.org/. For information on the NHS on donating to a local charity, see http:// www.NHS.org/NHS/Volunteer.html. For. information about the NSC on-going research on eMI, please visit the NSPR website (http: www.nhspr.org). For more details on the eMI study, please see http:www. NHS/EMI/Retinal-Eye-Research-Research - eMI-eMI-EMI- eMI - EMI- EMI - e MI-e MI- e MI - e-MI-receiving- and e-recovery-receptors-in-retinal-eye-research- e - MI-receptor-initiated-by-NHS-NSPR-NIS-NSS-NPS-NNS-NMS-NISS-NGS-N-NS-SNS-E-SN-S-N.S.S-E.S.-N-L-S.E.E.-E.N. - N-S - E-MI is a process termed microautophagy and delivered by the chaperone Hsc70 into late endosomes.

Document: processed_10.1177_2515841420954592.txt
Review of current and future practices for genetic testing of Mendelian eye disorders. Guidance on how to interpret results and guide genetic counselling. How to identify patients who may benefit from genetic screening? Family history and inheritance patterns. Establishing a precise molecular diagno-sis for any genetic eye disease can only be achieved through genetic testing. The first approved gene therapy for the IRDs caused by biallelic variants in the RPE65 gene, and several more genetic-based treatments emerg-ing, it is paramount that patients have access to the appropriate genetic testing for IRDs. A detailed clinical history and examination is of key importance to determine the likely aetiology of an eye disease. Any clinical features should be recorded using human phenotypic ontology (HPO) to provide a standardised form of charac-terisation which may guide diagnosis and man-agement 13,14. Syndromic patients with congenital eye malformations and learning diffi-culties are likely to have a chromosomal abnor-mality 15 and may be best referred to a paediatrician or clinical geneticist for further review and inves-tigation. The family history can help to deter-mine the inheritance pattern of Mendalian dis-ease such as autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, X-linked or mitochondrial. Over 13,000 features are regrouped in each parent-child and described in HPO (each with a unique identifier) It is important to note that HPO encompasses a range of clinical features which are important to individual individual clinical development. It can be extremely difficult to attribute a particular disease-causing gene unless molecularly confirmed, as this also has implications for future treatments and generations. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. In the UK, call the helpline on 0800-847-9255 or  visit the Samaritans for confidential support. In Europe, contact the National Institute of Health and Social Services on 0808 909090 or the National Institute for Health and Care Research on 0300-909090. In Australia, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) is on 011-856-9090 or the National College of Ophthalmology and ENT on 020-858-9088. In New Zealand, the NICE is on 0844-838-9111 or the Nuffield Trust for Ophthalmology is on 0208-859-9108. In South Africa, the NHS is on 10-11-908-907 or the University of South Africa is on 11-11. The NICE website is www.nhs.org.uk/os/os-topics-and-researchers/ostoplays/osuppliers/osopliers-top-lays.html. In India, the NIH is on 12-12-9109-9107. In Pakistan, the WHO is on 13-12.097-9057. In Sri Lanka, the UNICEF is on 14-13-9. It is on the 10-13.098-7. It will be on the 14-14-8. It was established in 2007 to unify the description of reported in the Online Mendelan Inheritance in Man (OMIMIM) database. In Thailand, the first description of the online MendelIAN Inherance in Man was published in 2007. In Nigeria, the same description was reported in 2008. In Kenya, the United States, the US, the UK and

Document: processed_13023_2023_Article_2798.txt
Non-syndromic inherited retinal dystrophies (inherited retinal diseases IRDs) form a large family of rare diseases. IRDs are characterized by the progressive dysfunction and loss of photoreceptors and retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), leading to severe impairment of vision or blindness. The onset of these conditions is usually between early childhood and late adolescence. Accurate clinical diagnosis of RP and LCA, as with other IRDs, remains a key step in determining the etiopathogenesis of IRDs and effectively managing these conditions. The clinical investigations and genetic testing needed to establish a confirmed diagnosis will be outlined. Current man - agement approaches will be discussed, focusing on the importance of the involvement of an interdisciplinary team from diagnosis and initial care through to longterm follow-up and support. The approval in 2017 of voretigene neparvovec, a gene therapy indicated for the treatment of adult and pediatric patients with vision loss. caused by confirmed biallelic RPE65 mutations, has raised great expectations and provided further support for the need for molecular diagnosis. The field of IRD is rapidly evolving, as other gene ther - apies are under development. It has become apparent that best-practice care for patients necessitates the involve - ment of a broad multidisciplinary team experienced in the management ofIRDs. This narrative review aims to provides a clinical over - view of the non-syNDromic generalized photorecep - tor dystrophicies, in particular RP and Leber congenital amaurosis. Retinitis pigmentosa is the most common IRD, with a worldwide prevalence of approximately 1:4000. The majority of forms of RP are associated with mutations of a single gene, autosomal dominant, and receseses of a gene dominant, X-linked, or even mitochondrial [2, 1921]. Retinita pigmentosa has a primary degenera that progresses to the loss of the cone-like cone of the retinitis pig - mentosa. However, there is usually relative preservation of macula function until an advanced stage of the disease. The first symptom of RP is the first concentric reduction of the visual field, followed by progressive concentric reductions of the field, ultiately resulting in central vision loss, resulting in ulti - mately a loss of vision. The most common term for IRD for admission to hospital is ‘retinitis Pigmentosa’ (RP), which is a heterogeneous group of rod - strophies characterized by aPrimary degenera of rod-a degenera. RP is most commonly encountered by pediatricians and ophthal - mologists in a routine clinical setting. It is one of the most severe forms of the IRD, and is called earlyonset retinal Dystrophy (LCA) LCA is a more severe form of LCA that is more likely to be encountered by child neuropsychiatrists and general ophthalmologists. It can be difficult to determine the genotype of a patient with RP, as it is highly heterogeneous in phenotypes and genotypes, and their diagnosis is complicated by the diver - sity of clinical presentations caused by mutations in a sin - gle gene or overlapping clinical phenotypes that can be associated with different causative genes. The ideal approach should go beyond the multidis disciplinary approach, in which team members work independently on a common issue within defined role responsibilities, to an interdisci - plinary one, where teams made up of various disciplines work collaboratively towards a shared, patient-centered outcome, with each discipline building on the expertise of the others. The goal is to offer accurate information on prognosis, risk of genetic trans - mission within the family, eligibility for treatment, or ongoing clinical trials, or treatment, for patients with IRDs. The best way to treat IRDs is to treat patients with RP and other

Document: processed_nihms-1927912.txt
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. During the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content. The eye is the window to the world around us. Vision enables us to be able to read, distinguish products at the supermarket, or recognize faces or emotions. About one third of IMD cohorts had ophthalmological abnormalities, resulting in partial or even total vision loss. Some IMDs even present with an isolated ocular phenotype, i.e., without developing clinically significant manifestations in other organs. The major metabolic abnormalities associated with eye abnormalities are those related to carbohydrate, protein, and metal metabolism. In addition, IMDs show involvement of the frontal part of the eye (cornea and lens) and around 50% of the neuroretina in the eye. IMDs can be congenital or acquired, appearing as the first symptom of an IMD or in the advanced/ late stages of disease. All IMDs with ocular phenotypes appear in about 200% of all IMDs (~40%). IMDs are associated with all major protein, carbohydrate, and protein-related abnormalities in all major organ systems. The list follows the classification in the knowledgebase of IMDs (IEMbase), the proposed nosology of IMDW and the international classification of IMWDs (ICIMD). Data source is the IEMbase. 2. The anatomy of theEye is well-defined and contains distinguishable structures. The anterior segment is the part of. the eye with the cornea on the most external side. The cornea is a transparent avascular tissue that provides the strongest focusing power, and at the same time plays a role in protecting the inner eye from the external environment. The iris controls the amount of light entering the eye. Behind the lens, we find the vitreous chamber filled with a clear and acellular gel called the vit reous humor. The overall function of this compartment is to maintain the spherical shape of the eyes. The pigmented cell layer called the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) protects the photosensitive cells from overexposure to light as well as detoxifies and recycles certain proteins or compounds derived from the visual cycle. All these structures may be affected in IMDs. 3. The different structures in the-retinal barrier may be the different structures that make up the photoreceptors and photoreceptor function. 4. The retina is a complex and specialized multilayered neuronal tissue consists of many subtypes of cells. 5. The retinal vascular endothelium form forms the blood-retina barrier that allows the light to pass without refraction and suspends the lens. It plays an indirect role in focusing the light on the retina, which is located in the posterior part ofThe eye. 6. This article is the seventh in this series and focuses on ocularphenotypes. The previous six issues are associated. with movement disorders, metabolic liver disorders, psychiatric presentations, cardiovascular diseases, cerebral palsy and skin manifestations. 7. The article is available in PMC 2023 September 24. The author is Dr. Alejandro Garanto, Departments of Pediatrics and Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands,. 8. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or go to www.samaritans.org for details. 9. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. 10. The National Suicide prevention Lifeline is available on the National Institutes of Health (NHS) on the NIH website for information on how

Document: processed_cells-12-02579-compressed.txt
The retinal endothelial cell (REC) plays a central role in the developmental formation of the mammalian neural-retinal vasculature. Genetic variants that change normal REC function can potentially impact the development of the entire neural retina and its function. The inner-BRB sustains neurons of the inner retina and comprises three microvascular beds, the superficial, intermediate, and deep plexus. We recommend the for those interested in the topic of retinal vascular development. Cells 2023, 12, 2579. The iBRB is a selective-like the Blood-Retinal-Barrier (BRB) and its high-barrier nature (iBRBi) is essential for the formation of neurovascular components of the neural retina. After maturation, RECs are essential for maturation of the Neurovascular Unit (NU) and after maturation the formation is essential of the retinal Endothelial Cells (RECs) FEVR/Norrie disease impacts the neural retinal Vasculature due to effects within the endothelial cells. The resulting advancing retinal branch leads towards the peripheral retina, resulting in the death of many retinal cells. This is important for this review because FEVR and Norrie disease are related to each other. The authors conclude that FEVR is a persistent fetal vascular syndrome (PVDS) with genetic disease mechanisms that affect retinal development and function. They conclude that PVDS is a potentially fatal and potentially terminal disease. The author concludes that the treatment for P VDS is to stop the progression of the disease to the next stage, which is the neonatal stage, and to stop all treatment of PV syndrome. The researchers conclude that this is a viable treatment option for PV Syndrome. The study concludes that this treatment option is not currently available to patients with P V syndrome. It is hoped that this article will shed light on the potential benefits and risks of P V Syndrome for the treatment of neonatal and neonatal retinal retinal conditions in the future. The article also includes a discussion of the benefits and drawbacks of the PVSS treatment for neonatal Retinal Retinopathy (PRT) and the potential risks and benefits of PVR syndrome for adults with PVTS. For more information on the P VSS, please visit the PvSS website. For more details on the benefits of this treatment, please go to the PVRSS website. Back to the page you came from. Click here to read the full article. Click HERE for the next part of the FZD4, LRP5, TSPAN12, ZNF408 KIF11, CTNND1, CTNNA1, ECM1, and TNSD1 study on the effects of FEVR on retinal retina and retinal endothelial cell proliferation and proliferation on the brain-brain barrier (RECs) and brain- brain barrier (BCB) in humans and mice. The final chapter includes the analysis of the effects on the retina of the FEVR-Norrie syndrome (FZD, LR, RRP, RSP, TNS, and RNS) on the development and functions of the RECs in the brain and brain. The review is based on the findings of the European Journal of Retinal Research (ESR) and is published by the Royal Society of Medicine (R.S.C.A. and R.E.J. (UK) in November 2013. The paper also includes the ESR, the European Society for Retinal Studies (UK), and the British Society of Retina and Stem Cells (BSR) on how the RPE and RSCs interact with each other to form the retina and the photoreceptors. The RPE cells, not the choroidal endothelium (RPE) play a key role in supporting the inner-Blood

Document: processed_opth-16-1127.txt
IRDs are now the most common cause of legal blindness in adults of working age in Australia and the UK. Genetic testing has evolved over the years, allowing case-by-case selection of appropriate molecular testing strategies. Success of genetic testing in identifying the disease-causing variant varies depending on patients specific diagnosis, age, and whether the responsible gene and/or pathogenic variant has been previously identified in IRD patients and/ or family members. There are over 30 active clinical trials for gene therapy for patients with IRD. This should betakenofhistoricalreferralprocesses,wheenetictes, and reassessment of IRD management to reassess the changes in several years following the recent Royal College of Ophthalmologists IRD guidelines. Patients referred to this retrospective evaluation of medical records of pre-existing patients of private Eye Surgery Associates of Victoria, Australia, should be considered for gene-based therapies for these patients. This study was published as part of the Clinical Ophthalmology 2022:16 11271138 1127 php and incorporate the Creative Commons Attribution  Non Commercial (unported, v3.0) License ( By accessing the work you hereby accept the Terms. Non-commercial uses of the work are permitted without any further permission from Dove Medical Press Limited, provided the work is properly attributed. For permission for commercial use of this work, please see paragraphs 4.2 and 5 of our Terms ( Ophthalmic Dovepress open access to scientific and medical research Open Access Full Text Article Published: 13 April 2022. Back to Mail Online home. Back To the page you came from. Back into the page.. The original article was published on April 13, 2022, and can be read in its original form here: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/opinion/article-article-221538/the-authors-of-this-study-reveal-the-need-for-genetic-testing-in-Australia-and-New Zealand-to-reassure-clinicians-with-IRD-patients-that-they-are-not-all-injured-or-at-risk-of retinal-diseases-and their-prognosis.html#storylink=cpy. Thisstudysoughttoevaluatethecurrentprevalenceofgenetic testing, in Victoria in Australia, and in New Zealand, should betoken to the currentprevalent distribution of IRDsandgeneticdiagnosesin a privatetertiarypractice in Victoria. The study was also published in the online edition of the Journal of the American Academy of Optometrists (JAA) on April 14, 2022. The embargo on the JAA’s online version of this article has been lifted for the duration of the study. We are happy to make clear that the JAAP is a non-profit organization. The JAA has no plans to change its policy on the use of genetic tests in Australia or New Zealand in the near future. We would like to make it clear that this study is not intended to be a ‘one-sided’ or “one-way’ conversation. We believe that genetic testing is an important tool in the treatment of inherited retinal disease (IRD) and that it should be used to inform the care of patients and their families of the potential benefits of gene therapy. We also believe that it is important to explore potential gene therapy opportunities, in addition to exploring the clinical diagnosis and inheritance of the condition, which may inform prognosis for patients and family members, including family planning considerations. The results of this study should be taken into account when considering the current state of the gene therapy market in Australia. We hope that the study will help inform the future development of gene therapies for IRDs and other retinal conditions. The findings of this review will be published

Document: processed_iovs-63-2-11.txt
Inherited macular dystrophies (MD) comprise a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by bilateral central visual loss and atrophy of the macula and underlying retinal pigment epithelium. The genetic spectrum of MD is very heterogeneous. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies allow studying a high number of genes and patients parallelly using exome-targeted approaches or customized gene panels. Almost 70% of ar/sMD patients had a molecular diagnosis at the end of this study, and we highlightthemostfrequentgenesanddescribemutations in very rare genes that had not been identified previously in the worldwide population. The study was conducted at the Genetic Department of the University Hospital Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, an IRD reference laboratory testing the largest number of IRD patients in Spain. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License. The author would like to make clear that the study was carried out in accordance with the tenets of the Helsinki Declaration and the Clinical Diagnosis Committee of our institution. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255 or visit the suicidepreventionlifeline.org. In Europe, contact the National Institute of Health and Welfare (NICE) on 0800-788-9090 or go to http://www.nhs.uk/who-is/suicideprevention/types-of-disease/diseases-and-prognoses/dysplastic-spectrum/dsystrophic-synthesized-syndrome-dyslip.html. In Australia, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) has a program to identify and treat people with dsysthetic systrophic systolic disease (Dsystolic) and Dsystocial dysplastic syndromes (DSM), which is a form of macular degeneration. The NICE program is funded by the European Commission (EC) and the European Society for Retina Research (ESR) and aims to improve the quality of care for people with DSD and DSM. The ENSR program is based on the European Convention on Retina Disease (ECR) which aims to promote the development of new treatments for DSM and other retinal diseases. In 2012, the European Council on retina disease (ECRT) approved the use of NGS to improve diagnosis and treatment of DSM, DSR and CCRD. For more information on the ENCRT program, visit the ECSR website or the ESC.org/DSR/Dyssthetic-Syndromes/Disease-Preventive-Skeletal-Diseases/DSM-Prevalence-Encephalitis. For information on how to get involved in the DSM program, see the ESC website or contact the ESC via email or the ESC via the contact page. For details on the ESC’s DSM/IDS program, go to: www.scse.org/. For more on the DSMS/IDS/IDS-prevalence.html, see: http:// www.sce.europa.gov/sce/dsm-preventive/DSMS-previous-diagnosis-prevention.html?preventative-skeletons-referring-to-the-DSM&previously-identified-satellite-pathogenicity&preventation=false&prevention-name=DSM%2C%2D&preview-title=IDS&preface=IDS%3C%3D%3A&pre

Document: processed_41436_2020_Article_759.txt
Over 2 million people worldwide are affected by inherited retinal degenerations (IRDs) Pathogenic variants (PVs) in over 270 genes have been associated withIRDs. Many of these elusivePVs are due to structural var iations (SVs) such as copynumber variations (CNVs) These CNVs are not readily available from the standard output of targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) pipelines. In this study we applied further bioinformatic analyses that permit detection of CNVs on the panel-basedNGS Genetic Eye Disease (GEDi) diagnostic test. We specifically searched for the Alu transposable element insertion in MAK, which is a common cause of IRD in people of Ashkenazi Jewish descent. Applying these techniques improved the genetic diagnostic rate for IRD patients by 10.2%. The study was approved by the institutional review board at the Massachusetts Eye and Ear (Human Studies Committee,MEE, USA) and adhered to the tenets of the Declaration ofHelsinki. Informed consent was obtained from all individualson whom genetic testing and further molecular evaluations were performed. Patients included in the study were recruited and clinically examined at MEE. Ophthalmic examination included best-corrected Snellen visual acuity, dynamic Goldmann visualfield testing, dark adaptation testing, and full-field electro-retinographic (ERG) testing. Genomic DNA extraction and targeted sequencing DNA was extracted from venous blood using the DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). All samplesunderwent Genetic Eye disease test (Gedi) sequencing asdescribed previously. 3The GEDi version used in this study included 266 genes known to be associated with monogenic inherited retina degenerations2,3(Supplementary Table S5). The capture libraries were sequenced on MiSeq (9 samples perrun) or HiSeq(96 samples per run) NGS data were analyzed using the Genome Analysis Toolkit (GAT) version 3 and annotated using the Variant Effect Tool (VEP) tool ( ensembor.org/tools//vi/vep) with additional annotations taken from gnomomomor. S.Phen-2 and retinal expression 20 were selected based on the minor allele frequency(MAF) in public databases of less than 03%. Dominant variants were considered with MAFAF 0.0% and were considered to be <0.01%. MAFF 0.1% was considered the most likely to cause IRD and was considered to have a 0.3% chance of causing IRD. The analysis of the transcripts is called RPGR (called RPGR) and is called Exon 15R. The transcript is called NMR_348 (called Exon15R) (R.P.R.S.1) (NGS.OR.3) (Supplementary. Table. S5) (Exon 15F) (MAFR) is the transcript based on RPGR.F.1. (MafR.1, NMR.2, MAFR.3, NMF.4, MafF.5, and Maf.4) (S.P., R.P, R.R., R, R, S, R and R) (E.S., E.E., E, F, G, H, J, K, L, M.E. and M.A. (E, B, C, H) The results were published in the issue of Genetics in MEDICINE, Volume 22, Number 6 |June 2020 1079. Back to the page you came from. BACK TO the page that you come from. WARNING: GRAPHIC CONTENT MAY OFFEND THE READER. The article has been updated to make it clear that the

Document: processed_13023_2021_Article_2145.txt
Inherited retinal diseases (IRDs) are a heterogenous group of visually debilitating diseases caused by patho - genic variation in proteins critical to retinal function. Because of the phenotypic overlap of several IRDs, establishing a definitive clinical diagnosis may be difficult. molecular genetic testing has become an important strategy to complement clinical findings and confirm or clarify a diagnosis. The American Academy of Ophthalmology Task Force on Genetic Testing and the European Reference Network for Rare Eye Diseases recommend genetic testing for all individuals with presumed or suspected IRDs for which a causative gene or genes have been identified. There are not enough IRD spe - cialists and ocular genetic counselors at academic medi - cal centers to meet patient demand for genetic testing. telemedicine-based genetic counseling services are becoming more widely available to support geographically or economically disadvantaged people in accessing specialists in ocular genetics. Lastly, the global use of genetic testing is limited because of the regional budgets and costs of healthcare systems to cover the cost of genetic tests, particularly in countries with low resources. The objective of this review is to provide a general understanding of the benefits and risks of testing and its clinical applications for IRDs and to improve patient outcomes. Genetic testing is an analysis of DNA variants that detect genetic changes or suitable clinical studies or treatment opportunities. It is important for affected individuals to be evaluated by a retina special - ist who is familiar with IRDs. Community-based retina specialists have successfully incorporated genetics into their practice by ordering testing themselves. The importance of both pre- and post-test genetic counseling should be recognized. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. In Europe, contact the European Association for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (EAPL) on 0800-788-9090 or visit the EAPL’s national suicide prevention helpline on +1 (800) 615-9088. In Japan, the National Institute of Health and Welfare (NICE) offers a range of services to help people with depression and other mental health issues. The National Institutes of Health (NIH) has a program to provide information and support on how to get involved in the fight against suicide. The NICE program is available in the UK, Australia, New Zealand, Canada and the Republic of Ireland. For more information, visit the NICE website. For information on the European scheme of care, visit http://www.nih.org/europe.org/. For more details on the National Cancer Institute (NCI) or the European Council on Cancer and Dementia (ECD), see http:// www.nci.europa.gov/cancer/disease-prevention-and-diseas/en/home/home.html. For details on how the NCI provides support for people with cancer and other neurological conditions, see http:www.ncis. org/cancer-research/en-UK/home-researcher/en.html/. For information about how the NCCI offers support for cancer patients with other neurological disorders, seehttp: www.cis.org / cancer-receiving-information-and/receipts.html. For more on the NCDS program, visithttp:http:www-ncis-org.uk/cis-recovery.html%. For more about the NCDC program, click here. For all the information about NCCS programs and services, see: http: www-www-nccs-org/cris-reconciliation-programs/ciscare-

Document: processed_biomolecules-13-00271.txt
Inherited retinal dystrophies are umbrella term for a multitude of retinal neurodegenerative diseases. Majority of proteins associated with IRDs are localized to the same cell types, organelles, and structures in mice as they are in humans. Disease progression in RP is also varied from mutation to mutation and individual to individual. The remainder of this review will focus on the underlying gene-dependent molecular mechanisms governing IRD pathogeneses, with our focus on speciO Ac cellularOrganelles and molecular pathways affected by mutations in IRD-causing genes. This review covers a majority of these genes, with an emphasis on those that are more commonly mutated. We conclude with a review of the molecular mechanisms of pathogenesis of IRDs and other retinal degenerative diseases, including retinitis pigmentosa (RP) and Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) and StargardtAos disease (Stargardt-Aos) The review concludes with a discussion of the gene- dependent molecular mechanisms that govern IRDs, including the molecular pathways that are affected by these mutations and how they affect IRD progression. The review also discusses the molecular mechanism of pathogenic retinal cancer (RCDs) and RPE (RPE) dysfunction, which is a major cause of both RCDs and CRDs and is detailed in Section 4 below. For more information on inherited retinal diseases, visit RetNet ( accessed on 28 August 2022). For more on RPE, visit the RetNet home page, or click here for more information about RPE and RDCs, including how to identify and treat RCEs and RCCs in your own child or grandchild. Back to the page you came from. Click here to go to the next part of this article. The first part of the article will be published on August 28, 2022, and the second part will be released on August 29, 2022. The third part of these two articles will be available on August 30, 2022 and August 31, 2022,. The third and fourth articles will appear on August 27, 2012, and September 7, 2012,. and September 8, 2012 respectively, and are available for download as e-books and e-penned versions of each of these articles. The fourth and final installment will be issued on September 14, 2013, and is available as a free download to the public on the publisher's website, RetNet (accessed on September 28, 2012). The final article will also be published as a print version of the e-book, and will be made available to the general public on September 29, 2013. For confidential support, call the National Institutes of Health on 1-800-273-8255 or visit the National Institute of Health (NICE) on 08/28/2013. The NICE website is also available for the download of the NICE e-leaflet, which includes information on NICE’s gene-related diseases, such as LCA, RP, CRD, RCD, and CRD-related conditions such as RPE. The study will also provide information on how to use immunohistochemical labeling to study IRDs in the mouse retina, including their localization in mouse retina using immunohistsochemical labeling. The last article will provide an example of how to label IRD proteins in the Mouse retina using Immunohistochem labeling. It is important to note that, while IRDs primarily affect the photoreceptorsAo survival, the mutated genes causing these diseases are not necessarily expressed by the photoresceptors. In humans, cone cell loss O Arst, which, in humans, causes a rapid loss of visual acuity and central vision due to cone cell death in the foveal/macular region of the retina, is one of the main causes of CRDs. The majority of CRDs are caused by

Document: processed_1-s2.0-S1350946221000367-main.txt
Gene therapy offers a theoretical advantage over small molecules classically used as medi - cines: it is a one-shot treatment that can provide a durable and poten - tially curative clinical benefit. The journey from concept to clinical application has been long, including the development of an experi - mental approach around the identified medical needs. The ability of gene therapies to provide durable benefits to human health justifies continued optimism and increasing efforts towards making gene therapy part of our standard treatments. This review will outline strategies being explored in this direction and technologies needed for their successful translation. In the United States, Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and European Medicines Agency (EMA) approvals of the first gene therapy products occurred between 2017 and 2018, including chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)T cells to treat B cell malignancies and AAV vectors for in vivo treatment of congenital blindness (Luxturna). Promising clinical trial results in spinal muscular atrophy and hemophilia also resulted in additional FDA approval since that time. In contrast to targeted replacement of single gene deficiencies that can be proposed in monogenic diseases, different strategies are so far required to treat these different degenerations with proven-called monogenic gene deficiencies (MDCs) This review outlines strategies to treat MDCs and other degenerations that are monogenic, such as retinal degeneration and Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP). In the U.S., the FDA and EMA have approved CART cells for use in the treatment of hemophilias B and spinal muscular  atrophy, respectively. In Europe, the EMA has approved a CART cell for the in vitro treatment of RPE (RPE) in patients with RPE-related retinal degeneration. In China, the FDA has approved the use of CART  cells in the retina, liver, and nervous system to treat RPE. In Russia, the European Commission has approved CAR T cells for RPE, RPE in patients with RPE-based retinal degeneration and RPE -related neurology. In Japan, the EU has approved AAV t cells for in vitro and in vivo use in RPE patients to treat rhodopsin-related neurodegenerative conditions such as macular degeneration (RDE) and retinitis pigmentosa. In Australia, the Food & Drug Administration has approved CART cells for use in patients with RDE and RDE-related macular glandular disease (RME) and RME-related myelodysplastic syndromes (RMD). In Canada, the Canadian FDA has approval for CAR t cells for the in vitro treatment of RPE and RMD-related diseases such as RME injectable mutation in mice. In the U.S. the FDA and EMA have approved CAR T cells for the in vivo treatment of RME, RDE, and RME-mediated neuromuscular dysfunction (RMO) in humans. The FDA has also approved CAR-t cells to be used in the treatment of patients with congenital blindness, hemophilia B, and spinal muscular atrophy and spinal  muscular atrophic atrophy (SMA) in the United S.A. (2018). In Europe, the FDA and E.U. have approved CAR T cell treatments for RME and RPM-related spinal Muscular Atrophy (2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, and 2018. The European Commission has approved CAR-T t Cells for RPM

Document: processed_nihms-1747988.txt
Phenotyping is crucial to interpreting genetic test results, especially when large panels are utilized. Physicians should be wary when genetic testing results do not comport with the clinical findings. Common genes might sometimes present in uncommon or previously unrecognized manners, although often reflecting common phenotypes modulated by disease severity. There are a growing number of genes previously reported only in syndromic retinal degenerations that are now being associated with non-syndromic disease (e.g. BBS, CLN, etc.) False negatives can also occur if a specific panel does not test for a gene of interest. Imagine a male patient with severe RP in his early 30s who undergoes genetic testing to determine if there is a chance that his children will have the disease. If the results of the genetic testing are inconclusive, he will be told that the chances that the children will be affected are difficult to sequence with present techniques. At least one free panel in the UK does not include it in its large list of genes tested, therefore it is possible that the patient's results will be inconclusive. There is a risk for attributing disease to mono-allelic changes, whilst these may be incidental again, the specificity of the phenotype is important. The patient should be seen by a physician with multisystem features, and the finding of a non-SyndromIC gene should be viewed cautiously in the context of a patient with multi-system features. The finding of variants in an autosomal recessive gene should arouse suspicion when the patient has a strong family history of X-linked disease, or conversely, physicians should keep an open mind for the possibility of an X- linked or mitochondrial disease in families with a family history suggestive of autosomal dominant (or even recessive) inheritance. It is also important to consider the possibility. of an autosomally dominant disorder with incomplete penetrance in a patient who has no apparently affected family members, in whom autosomal. recessive inheritance has been presumed. This is an example of the possibility for false positives calls. With a relatively high prevalence of disease- causing and hypomorphic variants in the general population, there is an increased risk of attributing. disease to monosomally. changes in the patient’s phenotypes, which may not be the cause of the disease, but could be a contributing factor to the diagnosis and treatment of the patient. There. are a Page 2 Retina. Author manuscript available in PMC 2023 January 01. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or go to www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. In Europe, call the European Association for the Prevention of Suicide (EAPS) on 0800-788-9090 or visit the European Society for Suicide Prevention (ESPS) on www.sophistication.org or the European Union for the prevention of Suicide. For the U-turn on the EAPS program, go to: http://www.sopS.org/. For the UK, the UK has a series of clinical trials for the RPGR gene, which is the third most common cause of inherited retinal disease behind ABCA4 and RHO, and accounting for 6.9% of all IRD cases. The RPGR is that exon 15 is that difficult to sequences with current sequencing techniques, so it is difficult to test for the gene with a free panel. The U.K. has a clinical trial for RPGR that is well known to the field and for which there are four clinical trials clinical therapy clinical trials are going on. The UK has an ongoing clinical trials trial for gene therapy clinical therapy trials for RHO, which causes 4070% of

Document: processed_main.txt
Inherited retinal disease (IRD) describes a phenotypically heterogeneous group of conditions. IRD is the most common cause of severe visual impairment among working-age individuals in the UK. Determining the genetic cause of IRD in affected individuals allows accu-rate assessment of risk of the disease to other family mem-bers, provides useful prognostic information for affectedindividuals, and can provide much-needed insight and understanding of the condition. IRd represents a particularly good clinical phenotype to provide comprehensive investigation by high-throughput sequencing. The American Journal of Human Genetics 100, 7590, January 5, 2017 75/C2112017sequencing technologies because it exhibits a high degree of phenotypic, genetic, and allelic heterogeneity, with more than 250 genes and loci associated with autosomal dominant, autosomal-recessive, X-linked, and mitochon-drial inheritance (RetNet), and it is often difficult to predict disease-associated gene from an individuals pheno-type alone. The authors contributed equally to this work 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 68, 69, 70, 74, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 113,. 116, 113 and 114, 116, 123, 114 and 113, 118, 119, 120, 119 and 123, 124, 123 and 124, 130, 129, 134, 125, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 145, 149, 156, 157, 163, 164, 165, 168, 169, 170, 174, 175, 177, 178, 188, 179, 189, 190, 199, 200, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 217, 214, 215, 216, 218, 223, 204,. 217, 215,. 222, 217,. 223, 226, 223,. 226, 227, 228, 233, 224, 233,. 24, 239, 230, 24-24, 25-26, 26-27, 27-28, 28-29, 29-30, 30-31, 29 and 30-32, 31-34, 32-33, 34-35, 36-37, 37-38, 38-39, 39-40, 40-41, 41-42, 42-43, 43-44, 44-45, 45-46, 46-47, 47-48, 48-49, 49-50, 50-51, 51-52, 52-53, 53-54, 54-55, 56-57, 58-58, 57-59, 58 and 59, 59 and 58, 60-59,. 61, 60 and 62, 61 and 58-old, 62- and 63-year-old,. 62-primary, 63- and 64-year, 64-old and 69-year old, respectively. The study was carried out at the University of Cambridge and Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London. The results were published in the Journal of Haematology, NHS Blood and Transplant Centre, Cambridge CB2 0PT, UK. The findings were also published in The New England Journal of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco.

Document: processed_nihms-1567493.txt
Inherited retinal degenerations (IRDs) are generally slowly progressing diseases that are caused by pathogenic variants in a given gene. Patients with rod-cone dystrophy often complain of lack of peripheral vision, limited contrast sensitivity, and poor low-light vision which can all lead to substantial limitations in daily life. Until recently those diagnosed with IRDs had no treatment options. Today, therapeutic advances, such as gene therapy, are providing new possibilities for IRD treatment. With the rapid advancements of these therapies, experts have already identified the need for standardized outcome measures and testing protocols. This, combined with the limitations in existing functional outcome measures, calls for the development of a sensitive, reliable, and validated measure to capture patient-reported outcomes (PROs) for use in IRD therapeutic trials. After a review of the existing PRO literature, we have found Page 2 Ophthalmic Genet. Author manuscript available in PMC 2021 February 26. Published in final edited form as: Ophthalmics Genet 2020 February 41(1): 16.doi:10.1080/13816810.2020.1731836. Author Manuscript Author. Manuscriptinstruments do not fully meet the needs of a PRO for gene therapy clinical trials therapy and suggest the developed PRO for this condition. Why use PRO instruments? Patient-reported outcome measures offer a means of capturing a patient's experience of how their condition affects their daily life as well as a novel novel application. These measures are commonly administered as a questionnaires that can be used as a screening tool for visual impairment or as a functional outcome measure. There is no gold standard test that can fully characterize the breadth of visual dysfunction in an IRD population. Here we will highlight three prominent challenges facing the current reliance on the current visual and retinal function tests. First, each clinical test does not capture an individual patient's visual dysfunction and there is no standard test to fully characterize that. Second, there is an application to uncovering aspects of vision and living that might be ignored by the patient and their living provider. Third, there will be particular emphasis on three key features of PRO development described by the FDA and their particular importance inIRD gene therapy populations. We will discuss the use of PRO instruments, status of current PROs, and recommendations for PRO development. The review was limited to PubMed indexed Englishlanguage journals and PROs identified in previous reviews that are disease-specific to a condition of inherited Retinal degeneration. The search waslimited to journals that are Disease-specific. The results were limited to journals identified in the previous reviews. We have found pages 2 and 3 of the review. This manuscript has not been published elsewhere and has not. been submitted simultaneously for publication elsewhere. It is available in HHS Public Access Author manuscript Ophthalmistic Genet. Author manuscript is available for download at PMC 2020 February 26, and it will be available at the end of the month for download in the US and in the UK at the beginning of March. The author has no conflicts of interest to disclose. We are happy to make this manuscript available to our readers as a free resource to help them with their reading comprehension, vocabulary, and vocabulary. We hope that this article will be of use to you in your reading comprehension and vocabulary in the years to come. We thank the authors for their hard work and for their efforts to help you understand the benefits of gene therapy and the potential benefits of retinal dystrophies for patients with IRD. For confidential support, call the Retinal Dystrophy Clinic at (734) 232-8080, or the Kellogg Eye Center, University of Michigan, 1000 Wall Street, Ann Arbor, MI, 48105, or Fax: (732) 764-3906. For support in the U.S., call the National Institutes of Health (NIH) on 1-800-273-8255 or the National Institute of

Document: processed_jci-133-171356.txt
methods with the primers listed in Supplemental Table 3, followed by digestion with restriction enzyme NheI (Anza IVGN0066, Thermo Fisher). W53X-targeting sgRNA was designed and validated in mouse fibroblasts (50) isolated from Kcnj13W53X/+ mice. Five days after injection, imag - ing was carried out to assess the delivery based on GFP reporter mRNA. gDNA was isolated from the optic cup of these mice to determine the on-target and off-target effects of base editing. We thank the Stem Cell & Regenerative Medicine Center (University of WisconsinMadison) for fellowship funding support to MK. We acknowledge the Retina Research Foundations Kathryn and Latimer Murfee Chair (to KS), the M.D. Matthews Research Pro - fessorship (to BRP), and the McPherson ERI Sandra Lemke Trout Chair in Eye Research (to DMG). The research was also supported by University of Wisconsin Partnership Education and Research Committee funds and the Harrington Discovery Institutes Gund-Harrington Scholar award (toKS) The Journal of Clinical Investigation RESEARCH ARTICLEJ Clin Invest. 2023 133(19):e171356 14 graphs and values behind any reported means, are in the Supporting Data Values file. Additional data can be made available from the corresponding author upon request. The authors thank Jens C. Eickhoff for advice on statistical analysis on Blindness Preventing Blindness (Jens Eikhoff, R.S.M., and B. Krishanu Oraha, edu) The authors also thank the University ofWisconsinMadison for their support in the study. The study was supported by NIH awards R01 EY024995 and R24 EY032434 ( to BRP) and U01 AI1427, RM1 HG009490, and R35 GM118062 (to DRL) NIH grants S10 OD106665 and S018221 and Research to Prevent Blindness to Research to Research (P.E. and R.H) (to B.M.) The authors are also grateful to the University. of Wisconsin for their generous support in this study and for the support of the Wisconsin Institute for Regeneration and Regeneration (U.S.) (P-E-M-R-S-M). The authors would like to thank the U.W. Department of Health and Human Services for their generosity in the form of grants and research support to the U-W Partnership for Regenerative and Regenerative Research (U-WPR) and the Wisconsin Institutes of Regeneration & Regeneration Research (WIR) (PKS, PKS, YW, DS, GAN, AAA, DMG, DRL, SG, KS, and BRP). The researchers are also thankful to the National Institutes of Health (NIH) for their funding support for the study and the support to GAN and DRL (R01 E Y024995, R24E024995,. and R36 EY32434, R35 HG118065, and S10OD1065). The study is open-source and can be downloaded from the J Clin Invest website at: http://www.jclincininvest.org/jclininvest/article/JClinInvest/ article/j ClinInvest/article.asp?title=JClincInvest/J ClinInvest%20Invest/2023%201356%2014%2015%20/J%20Clininvest%20Study%20Case%20%20and%20Author%20s%20Conflict%20of%20Research%20Involvement%20in%20The%20Molecular%20Model%20(1%2B%2C%3B%3C%2F%2A%

Document: processed_fgene-13-858556.txt
methods employed in genetic studies on Retinal Dystrophies in India. Phenotypes studied, and the methods used to identify mutations in Indian families are shown above. All IRD patients need comprehensive low vision assessment and rehabilitation. Diagnostic and management challenges in a clinical set up in India with respect to IRDs and other IRDs are variable clinicalpresentation, lack of diagnostic and imaging tools in examining all IRDs, and lack of uniform guidelines for genetictesting. Figure 1 shows a timeline of major developments in this area of human genetics and genomics. Figure 2 shows a range of chosen genes from selective analysis of candidate candidates. Figure 3 shows a selection of genes from chosenmutations of candidate candidate candidates for genetic analysis of RP patients and their families. The most common inherited retinal dystrophie (IRDs) seen at L. V. Prasad Eye Institute (LVPEI), a tertiary care referral centernetwork in Southern India, are retinitis pigmentosa, LCA,juvenile retinoschisis, achromatopsia, Stargardt s disease and Best disease. The common syndromes associated with RP in this patient population are Usher Syndrome followed by Lawrence Moon Bardet Biedl Syndrome (LMBB) Patients with Usher syndrome (USH)Type 1 and type 2 are more common than type 3 and present inthe 1st to 2nd decades of life. Though patientswith IRD in India currently do not have access to speci fic visual implants or gene therapy, surgical intervention for associatedproblems like cataract, capsular phimosis, angle closureglaucoma, retinal detachment, macular pathology etc., may berequired. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For confidential help in the UK call 08457 909090 or visit www.suicidalprevention Lifeline.com. For information on how to help in India, visit the National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences (NIMH) in New Delhi. For details on the National Institutes of Health in India visit the NIMH’s National Institute for Neurological Diseases and Neurosurgery (NID) website. For more information on the NID, see http:// www.nimh.org/NIMh/Nimh-NIN/NIN.html. The NID is a leading centre for the study of retinal diseases in India and is based in the state of Uttar Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand. For further information on NIMh, call the NICE helpline on +1-856-788-8200 or visithttp://www-nimH.org.uk/. For more on NID and NID-related issues, see the NIPH website. for more information. for details on NIN-related topics, seehttp:// www-NIPH.com/NIPh- NIN/ NIPHC- NIPC- Nipah-Nipah, or for other NICE- related issues, click here. For the full report, see: http:www.nipah.org / NIPhi/Niphi/ Niphi-Nipphi-niphy-Nipsh-nipsh.html/. For the complete report, please see:http: www.NIPhi.gov.uk/Npinni/ Npinni-Npinsh-in-India/Nipshi- Nipshi.html?p=858556.

Document: processed_bjophthalmol-2020-315878.txt
The USH2A gene (OMIM #608400) encodes usherin, a transmembrane protein. Usherin is important in the development and homeostasis of the inner ear and retina. Different mutations within this gene have been associated with a large heterogeneous group of diseases, including retinitis pigmentosa (RP) and Usher syndrome type II (USH2) These results would be useful for prog - nosis, clinical management and genetic counselling and should provide strong evidence- based data support for gene therapy studies. MeThods subjects and ethical statement This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Eye and ENT Hospital of Fudan University and adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of Declaration of Table 1. In the present study, we enrolled 1381 patients with IRD patients under. - went molecular analysis and all those with USH1A mutations were identified. The exact genetic and phenotypic characteristics of patients with USh2A mutations in Chinese patients with inherited retinal disease (IRD) remain unknown. The presence of at least one truncating mutation was associated with earlier presentation of visual decline. However, the mutation frequency and genotypicphenotypic char - acteristics vary widely between different ethnic groups. The results of this study could be used to inform the development of gene therapy treatments for IRD and other retinal diseases. The study was funded by the Chinese National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (CASI). The authors gratefully thank the CASI for their support and assistance. For confidential support, call the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NICE) on 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.nci.org.uk/. For confidential. support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In. the U.S. contact the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1- 800-273 -8255. For. confidential support on suicide matters call theNational Suicide Prevention Line on 1 (800) 273-8477 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. In the UK, contact The Samaritans at 08457 909090 or click here for confidential support. For in-depth information on suicide prevention, visit the Samaritan’s Samaritans website or call the Lifeline on 0800-909090. In Europe, the National Cancer Research Fund (NCR) offers a range of support and information on how to get started on a suicide prevention plan. For more information on the NCR, see http:// www.nrc.org/suicide/prevention/prevent-suicide-plan/prevalence-and-revention-of-schizophrenia-in-young-people-who- suffer-from-retinitis-pigmentosa-or-receiving-retina-disease. For details on the NRC/NCR/previous-recipients-with-IRD/receipts-and/researchers-on- IRD-referred-to-the-NICE program, see the NCC/previously-published-article/article/NCC/NEC/NRC/NAC/NIC/NSC/NTC/NCS/NPC/NNC/NCE/NCH/NU/NUC/NUE/NEM/NCL/NFC/NOC/NGC/NIN/NEX/NCT/NEN/NICE. In Australia, the NICE/NCN/NUS/NUK/NED/NEU/NUG/NHS/NUN/NIES/NEG/N

Document: processed_41433_2022_Article_2262.txt
Inherited retinal dystrophies (IRD) are a group of rare conditions characterised by severe vision loss. IRDs result from pathogenic variation in any one of more than 220 different genes. One such gene is RPE65 which encodes all-trans retinyl ester isomerase, an enzyme critical to the visual cycle. Biallelic pathogenic variants inRPE65 cause a spectrum of severe rod-mediated IRDs, including Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) type 2 and retinitis pigmentosa(RP) type 20. Voretigene Neparvovec (VN, Luxturna) is the first ever FDAapproved gene therapy. VN treatment is now offered worldwide inselected ocular gene therapy centres. The real-world data that are being gathers increase our understanding of the vast potential of gene therapy whilst highlighting the associated risks in somecases. It was decided to treat his lefteyefirst, which had the worse VA and VF. The patient met all the criteria and was offered treatment. Following the operation, the patient was advised to maintain a 24 hupine position and was prescribed topical prednisone for 24 weeks. At baseline the patient s VA (under normal and low luminance), colour vision, and contrast sensitivity were tested using natural pupils. He was then given a sub-rectinal injection of VN (PPV), followed by a tapering dose for 10/10 days. The case presented here illustrates both the bene fits and pitfalls associated with ocular Gene therapy in the same patient. It consisted of 25 G parsa vitrectinal injections (PPVs) and surgical closure of all ports with air ports with 8/0/0 vicryl closure ports with all surgical ports. At the baseline report, we logised the patient’s VA, VF, contrast sensitivity and light sensitivity for 2 weeks and 4 weeks following the operation. At. baseline, welogised the baseline, 4% topical cyclopentol 1% daily for 4 weeks and 2 weeks topical chloramphenicol 1% twice daily for 2.5 times daily (standard practice) following the op. We logised that the patient maintains a 24h upine position for 24 h upine positions for 24 hours following the surgery and was. prescribed topical Prednisone at one mg/kg/day, maximum of 40 mg/day for a maximum of 7 days, for a total of 4 weeks. After the surgery, he was prescribed oral steroids as per the protocol (maximum of 40mg/kg-a-day, daily for amaximum of 3 days for a 7 days. for aTotal of 10 days, followed by an oral steroid injection of 0.5ml-1ml-2ml-3ml-4ml. He had no complications during the operation and was given a topical steroid injection for 24 days following the procedure. After a detailed discussion of all the risks and bene fits of Vn, the. patient wished to proceed, and informed consent was taken. Other than IRD, he had noocular or medical history to note. Other patients with IRD have severe loss of light perception at any intensity along with profound reduction in navigational vision. The role of gene augmentation therapy in RPE 65 mediated disease was studied in two open-label phase one studies, and onerandomised controlled phase three trial. Overall, the trials reported a consistent improvement in navigATIONAL vision, light sensitivity and visual fields. There are three criteria to be met for the patient to be considered for treatment in the United Kingdom: 1. Presence of viable retina (At least 100 microns central retinal thickness on OCT scan) 2. Three or more optic disc areas without atrophy or pigmentary degeneration within posterior pole of the retina 3. A remaining VF within 30 of fixation. The Patient met all of the criteria

Document: processed_Acta Ophthalmologica - 2019 - Holtan - Inherited retinal disease in Norway   a characterization of current clinical and.txt
Inherited retinal disease (IRD) is among the most common cause of low vision and blindness in children and young adults. The first gene therapy of IRD has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration and European Medicines Agency ( 2016 Apte 2018) Two retinal prostheses are 286Acta Ophthalmologica 2020 commercially available ( 2017 2018) Accurate clinical characterization (phenotype)and genetic characterization (genotype) are very important for the selection of the most suitable treatment options. Since these treatments are customized according to the specific phenotype and genotype, systematic registration ofgenetic and clinical data of patients with IRD is highly warranted. The purpose of this study was to characterize current clinical and geneticknowledge of patientswith IRD living in Norway and estimate the prevalence. To fulfil this purpose, a comprehensiveregistry with high data integrity of clinical and genetic data was established,thus providing a foundation for the assessment of current and future healthcare needs for this patient popu-lation and assuring early treatmentwith new therapies. The registry was established in MedInsight in 2016. The biobank is approved to protect privacy and security of the patients. The data is linked to the Norwegian national register officewith a secure link key to allow for accurate updates and follow-up. Each sample is uniquely coded enabling linkage to patient data through the patient data list. Biological material from patients and their par-ents, from their parents and siblings, is also linked through a separate code and includes biologicalmaterial from patients. Parental DNA is used to validate genetic results of patients who are not genetically solved and if the patient is genetically solved, treatment of retinaldisease or other ophthalmic conditions is restricted to personnel involved in clinical follow-ups according to Norwegian privacy laws. The patient data unit, Oslo University Hospital, has approved the biobanks. The Biobank was created in 2016 after approval from the Regional Ethics Committee, south-east Norway, #2015/15K84/84. The medical history including other illnesses, hearingstatus, syndromic features, regular medication, age at onset of symptoms and self-reported perception of vision was also included. Six basic information fans were included: (1) family history with familyidentifier (ID) number, parents birthplace, consanguinity between parents and registration of other family mem-bers with the same disease including registry ID. (5) genetic status with mode of inheritance, genetic analysis method,date of analysis, results of genetic analysis and if they are genetically solved. (6) technical examination including electroretinography (ERG), electrooculography (EOG), optical coherence tomography (OCT) andultra-wide-field autofluorescence (UWAF) (7) medical examination including clinical diagnosis, visual acuity, general ophthalmics examination with detailson status of the vitreous, optic disc,fundus pigmentation, macula and vessels (8) genetic information about the patient, if he or she has IRD, and if he/she has any other conditions that may cause vision loss or blindness. The study was published in the journal Ophthalmology and was funded by the Norwegian National Institutes of Health (Norwegian National Institute of Health and Patient Safety and Security) and the Norwegian Research Council (NRIS) The study is open-source and free to download. The paper is available online in English and in German, with an emphasis on the use of the internet as a tool to help people understand the risks and benefits of the disease and how best to treat IRD. For confidential support, call the NICE helpline on 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.nhs.org/ IRD/IRD/IRD/IRD-Research-Report.html. For more information, visit the IRD researcher and 

Document: processed_diagnostics-13-02413-compressed.txt
Adaptive optics (AO) technology has led to the development of non-invasive ultra-high-resolution imaging of retinal cells and blood vessels. AO could detect early changes in photoreceptor density before visible clinical signs or abnormalities in conventional imaging techniques. Despite the lack of a standardized imaging protocol and image analysis methods in AO, the detailed visualization of Retinal cell survival provided by AO offers potential applications in measuring efO Acacy in stem cell and gene-targeted therapies. The only commercially available AO camera (AOFIO) is illuminates a small region of the retina and captures 40 images from a 44O Aeld or 44 O Aeld over 2 or 2.5 frames per second. Since each image is acquired in. milliseconds, each image quality is not affected by movements in the ocular onecular movements, and does not affect the image quality. The AOFIO camera is available from Imagine Eyes, Orsay, France, and from AO fundus, France. The O Andings in IRDs have been demonstrated in quantitative imaging of choriocapillaris (OCTA) in inherited retinal diseases (IRDs). IRDs comprises a wide range of retina degenerations, which collectively is the leading cause of visual disability and legal blindness in the working-age population. One gene-based therapy has been approved for the treatment of RPE65-associated retinopathy while gene- based therapies for other IRD genes are still under investigation. In sensor-based AO and computational AO systems, aberrations are detected based on optimization algorithms, and the distortion degree of the wavefront is estimated according to the properties of multiple serially taken consecutive images. The controlling system coordinates the sensor and controller to provide the best image quality with low aberations. In hardware AO,. also known as hardware Ao, wavefront sensors are used to measure the abergations of the reO Cected light. The calculated aberration is transferred to the controller and translates into signals to be sent to a deformable mirror and acts as a guide to ongoing corrective changes of the mirror. Then, the modiO Aed wave front is detected by the camera and a high-resolution image is captured (Figure 1). In sensorless AO or computational AOs, the aberration is detected and corrected by a wavefront corrector. The control system can be used to adjust the camera to provide a better image quality and a more accurate image. This comprehensive review discusses the main concepts of AO in ophthalmic imaging. It also discusses the pitfalls and limitations of Ao in research and clinical practice. It concludes that AO can be useful for tracking a diseaseAos natural history at the cellular level and deO Aning outcome measures for therapeutic interventions in clinical trials. The study was published in the Journal of the American Academy of Ophthalmic Surgery (JAS) in December 2013 and is available on the JAS website in English and in French. For confidential support, call the National Institutes of Health (NIH) on 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.nhands.org/. For confidential. support in the U.S. and Canada, contact the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) at 1-866-856-3800 or http:// www.nidDK.org/diseases/rod-cone-dysplastic-dystrophy. For information on how to donate to the NIDDK, visit the NidDK website or go to www.NIDK.org. For more information on NIDK, visit www.NIH.org or www. NID DK, or go online to http://nid DK.gov/dizeffects/ rod-cone dystrophy, or for

Document: processed_genes-12-00147.txt
Optic neuropathies are among the most common causes of blindness in the working age population. Inherited forms include Leber Hereditary Optic Neuropathy (LHON) and Dominant Optic Atrophy (DOA) LHON is a primary mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) disorder, with the majority of cases caused by one of three point mutations. DOA is nuclear-encoded mitochondrial optic neuropathy caused by mutations in the OPA1 gene (3q28-q29), which encodes for a multimeric dynamin GTPase protein located within the mitochondrial inner membrane. Both LHON and DOA can mitigate some of these challenges and act as useful model diseases of more complex neurodegenerative disease processes. Transcriptomics can be used to interrogate mitochondrial dysfunction and the pathways that ultimately lead to cell loss and disease. As technologies and analysis techniques develop, the power of omics investigations is likely to increase. As well as the transcriptome, the proteatic analysis techniques will develop to develop new bioinformatic tools to develop treatments for these diseases and others. For example, assessing transcribed features in a particular sample of the eye can beused to uncover areas for further investigation. For. example, comparing gene expression over time or between control and diseased states (such as optic Neuropathies) can uncover differential areas for investigation to uncover. further areas of investigation. for a particular investigation. The emerging field of multi-omics (or vertical - omics ) focuses on complimentary comparisons across domains (Figure 1) and is already being used in mitochondrial research. For for example, highlighting changes replicated across the transcriptomes of the metabolome and metabolome can carry particular significance in mitochondrial disease research. See. 1 of 15 development. Genes 2021,12, 147. 2021 - 147.2 of the development of the RNA-seq neuroprotection. gene-therapy for optic Neuro Pathies. see. 1.15 of 15. The development and maturation of -omics technologies can be defined as high-throughput technologies capable of detecting differences in a multitude of molecular constituents in organisms. See the. 3rd. edition of this article for more information on how transcriptomics is being used to investigate mitochondrial disease and its potential applications beyond the eye. see the. 4th. issue of the European Journal of Medical Genetics (ECG) (http://www.ecg.europa.org/content/early/2013/07/23/ECG-4/1/3/4/2/3.html) and the 6th.issue of the ECG-6 (ECg-6.1/2). See. the. 6th edition of the EGC-6/2 (http:www.ECG.eu/news/2013-07/24/ECGV-6-2/1.html). The 6th issue of this issue is the European journal of the ESCG-5/2.html ( http: www.ecG.uk/news/. The. 7th. edition is the ESCG-7/2/. The 7th and 8th issues of the Europe Journal of the ESPG-8/2, respectively, are the European Journals of the ESG-9/3, respectively. The 8th and the 8th.Issue is the Europe Journals of The ESCGP-9 (http): http:. www. ESCG.com/News/ 2013/08/09/ECGP-7.html. and the 9th. Issue is the first of a series of articles on how the availability of powerful emerging techniques, including transcriptomics, are quickly revolutionizing both diagnosis and development of novel therapies for mitochondrial disease. The. 9th and 10th issues will be published. The 10th and 11th issue will be the European issue of The European Journal of The ESPGP-8 (

Document: processed_nihms-1685213.txt
IRD constitute the leading cause of legal blindness in England and Wales. We categorise IRD on the basis of the primarily affected retinal cell-type and disease natural history (stationary or progressive) We prioritised the selected conditions based on: (I) their prevalence, (II) ongoing trial(s) of novel therapeutics, and (III) distinctive imaging findings. Stargardt disease STGD ( ABCA4, OMIM 601691) is the most common MD. The most common presentation is a widespread deposition of lipofuscin (bisretinoids) in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), leading to the classical fundus appearance of retinal flecks. The earliest structural changes of the disease are Page 2 Ann Eye Sci. Author manuscript available in PMC 2021 April 28.appear to spare the foveola ( 6). Photoreceptor loss is likely to precede RPE degeneration both of which contribute to choriocapillaris loss ( 23,24). In vivo cellular imaging using adaptive optics (AO) proved reduced cone densities and increased photoreceptor spacing (25,26). The cones can be reliably counted, and tracked over time ( 27). BD BD is the second most commonMD and is an autosomal dominant condition, due to disease-causing variants in BEST1 (28). Early stage (Stage 1) disease is characterised by a normal fundus or minimal RPE changes (pre-vitelliform). Over time, this lesorption can start to progressing to a pseudohypopyon (Stage 3). Stage 1 are associated with normal visual acuity (A), and patients can be identified during a family survey or co-incidentally. A reduction in subretinal signal from stage 3 onwards can result in a vitelliruptive stage (stage 4). End-stage disease (Stage 5) is characterise by either sub-RPE fibrosis, or high-risk vitello-vascularisation (NVV) lesion. Despite the classification of stages, there is rarely a predictable progression from one to the other. The classical appearance of BDBD is the single, bilateral symmetrical egg-yolk-like (viteshiform) lesorion at thefovea (Stage 2). The lesion gravitates within the yellow materially within the lesion and gravitates to inferior and inferior acuity within the materially (Vitellion) Stage 1 is rarely predictable from stage 2 to stage 4. A reduced signal from one stage onwards can be observed from Stage 3 onwards, with a high viteshion lesion with high vitelion materialisation on one side of the vesicle. This is known as a high-retinal vesicularisation lesion (HSV) and is a common cause of blindness in the elderly. Stage 1 can also be seen in children and young adults. Stage 2 is associated with low-grade acuity, and patients are often referred to the local optician for treatment. Stage 3 is the stage where the lesoriform materially undergoes resorption, with inferior and superior acuity. Stage 4 is the final stage, when the patient can be referred to a specialist for further treatment. This can be achieved by using a combination of OCT and electrophysiological evaluation (OCT) to assess the severity and extent of the outer retinal loss (photore receptor loss) ( 9,10,1822). Stage 5 is the point at which the patient starts to undergo resorptive acuity changes ( Stage 5) and the patient is referred to an optician. Stage 6 is the end-stage where the patient progresses to a low-level acuity lesion that can be seen by the optician (Stage 6). Stage 7 is the first time the patient has been seen by a specialist. Stage 8 is

Document: processed_fphar-12-654445.txt
High concentrations of ATP are present within cells and ATP is released into the extracellular milieu during cellulardamage or death. Extracellular ATP acts at P2 receptors, including ligand-gated ion channel (P2X1-7) receptors and metabotropic G-protein linked purinergic receptors. Excessive ATP released from stressed retinal cells is recognized as an endogenous danger signal in retinal injury or age-related macular degeneration (AMD), glaucoma,and diabetic retinopathy (DR) In this review, we. focused on the mutual or opposite roles of ATP and adenosine in retina cells linked to the three types of blinding diseases (AMD,glaucomA, and DR) as well as emphasized the therapeutic potential of agonists and antagonists of ATP. receptors and ARs for these diseases. We. also discussed the upregulation of P2X7Rpredisis in the retinal neurons to damage. For instance, the intra-ocular pressure in the eyes is chronically elevated leading to the death of a subpopulation of RGCs (RGCs) from the Retinal Neuronal Cell Death or Survival (RNCD) treatment. We concluded that the treatment of RNCD with ATPalso impairs retinal cell death, leading to an increased level of ATP release from the cells. We also showed that the agonists BATP-P7 (ZATP7) and BATZ7 (BZAT7) agonists are more effective in the RCCD treatment than the agonist BZP-7 (PZP7). We also highlighted the potential of the anti-ATP agonists to treat glau coma and diabetic retine (DR), among other conditions, in the future. For more information, visit Frontiers in Pharmacology and Drug Discovery, the Experimental Pharmacology section of the journal Frontiers In Pharmacology, and the Frontiers Drug Discovery section of The European Journal of Clinical Pharmacology (FPDD) and the European Journal for Drug Discovery (ECD) sections of the journals Frontiers Pharmacol. and EPDD, and Frontiers Pharmaceuticals. and Pharmacology. and FPDD. Back to the page you came from. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.com or the Daily Discussion to help people understand today's featured news stories. The Daily Discussion is open-ended and can be updated until the end of the article. The online version of this article includes comments from the authors, the editor-in-chief of FPHar and the editorial board of F PHar. and the reviewer- reviewer-director of the European journal, the University of Sao Paulo, Brazil. The embargo on this article has been lifted until the publication date of 15 June 2021. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit the Samaritan’s Samaritans’ website (http://www.samaritans.org/ Samaritans/). For confidential. support, contact The Samaritans at 1-800-273-8255 or the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-844-9255. For information on how to donate to the Samaritans, visit http:// www.samarsitans. org/. For more on the benefits of anti-ADP drugs, visit the National Institutes of Health (NIH) website ( http:www.nhs.gov/drug/adenosine/drug-drug-receptors). For details on the benefits of antidote and antibody drugs, visit the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NICE) or the International Agency for Research on Diabetes and Malaria (http: www.nih.org). For more details, see the

Document: processed_EMMM-14-e15941-compressed.txt
Inherited retinal diseases (IRDs) are among the most prevalent causes of vision loss/blindness of genetic origin in the working-agepopulation. IRDs display extensive genetic hetero-geneity with more than 250 causative genes identified thus far. Degeneration of photoreceptors (PRs) is the common landmark in IRDs even though a precise knowledge of the underlyingmolecular and cellular events is still far from reach. Targeting key effectors that impact on common dysregulated pathways in neuronal damage during diseaseprogression hold great promise for therapeutic purposes. MiR-181a/bases are highly expressed in the central nervous system and are part of the miR181 family of miRNAs. miR-1/2/3/4/5/6/7/8/9/10/11/12/13/14/15/16/17/18/19/20/21/22/23/24/25/26/27/28/29/30/31/32/33/34/36/37/38/39/40/41/42/43/44/46/47/48/49/50/51/52/53/54/55/56/57/58/59/60/61/62/63/64/65/66/67/68/69/70/72/73/74/75/76/78/79/80/82/83/84/85/86/87/88/89/90/91/92/93/94/95/96/97/98/99/100/101/102/103/104/104-104/105/106/107/108/111/112/113/114/115/114-111/111-112/112-113/115-114/111+/112+/115+/114+/116+/117+/118/119/120/122/123/124/125/126/127/128/129/130/132/133/135/136/130+/135+/136+/137/138/139/139+/140/141/142/143/144/145/146/147/150/150+/155+/156+/157+/159/160/170/167/168/169/170+/167+/168+/169+/199/170&170/170/.. The highgenetic heterogeneity of IRDs significantly limit the set up of 1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Pozzuoli, Italy 2Ecosustainable Marine Biotechnology Department, Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn, Naples, Italy 3Medical Genetics, Department of Precision Medicine, University of Campania L. Vanvitelli, Italy 4Molecular Life Science,  Scuola Superiore Meridionale, School of Advanced Studies, Naples,. Italy 5 medical Genetics,   University of Naples Federico II, Italy 6 medical genetics,  Italian National Research Council (IRGB), Milan, Italy 7 scuola superiore meridionALE, Italy 8 institute of Biochemistry and Cellular Biology (IBBC), Monterotondo, Rome, Italy 9 institute for Genetic and Biomedical Research ( IRGB), National Research council (CNR), Milan. *Corresponding author. Tel: +39 081192830628 E-mail: /C2112022 The Authors. Tel. +39081192930628 *C 2112022 E- Mail: *C21 12022 C2112024 C21 12024 C-2112023 C-1912022 C-312024 D-314024 D+314023 D

Document: processed_nihpp-rs3011096v1-compressed.txt
methods used in the identi                 cation and integration of methylation quantitative trait loci ( cis-mQTL) and expression quantitative trait methylation ( cis/eQTM) with AMD GWAS and retina HiC chromatin map. Figure 2 shows distribution of the distance between the CpG and the transcription start site (TSS) of the respective gene is plotted against the number of eQTMs. Figure 3 shows associations between DNA methylation and gene expression through genotypes. The red horizontal lines represent the genome-wide signi  unnecessarilycance level (PSMR = 9.29 x 10-7). The blue diamonds represent log10(P values) from mQTLs, respectively. The diamond indicates the top mVariant for independent mQ TL signal. The coloration of the points is determined by their LD with respect to the mQtl in purple. The top GWAS variant in the region is also labeled. The second plot shows log 10(Pvalues) of. the variant association with CpGs in PARK7 gene region from m QTL results. The grey and blue diamonds are from mqTLs and the blue diamonds. are from eQTM. The green lines are from SMR tests for association between gene expression and DNAm (E2M_SMR). Shown on each y axis are the log10 (P values), respectively, for DNAm levelsPage 34/40. R2 is squared Pearsons correlation between methylation. and gene. expression (M2E_ SMR). The red. horizontal lines. represent the DNAm level (P = 938 x 9-7) and the red. vertical lines. are for the gene expression levels (P=9.38 x 8-8). The green horizontal lines are for DNA m levels (PSM) and their normalized levels (MM) (PSR = 9/9 x 8.8 x 7.5). The black horizontal lines show the DNA m level (Mm) and its normalized expression (Pm) (P: 9/8 x 6.5 x 7). The top plot shows the association between DNAm and the SNP (SNP) for the Park7 gene (cg08027640) (p: 9.4/7) (psm) is for the SNP cg24307499 located in gene body and NLRP2 on chromosome 19. The bottom panel shows the cluster of Cpg cg21653793 located in 5UTR and ABCA1 on chromosome 9. e: Proportion of retina CPGs across different tissues in CpGS of signi                 tececant mQSLs. f: Pro proportion of retina mQLSs across different. tissues in cpGs of Signi                 cetecant MQTL’s (signi             “m”) Figure 3 also shows the proportion of EQTM sites on chromosomes 16 and 19 on arm p and q (p and q) and eQ TM sites on chromosome 22 on arm q (q) and 19 (q), respectively. It is shown that eQM sites regulate more than 10 eTMs and are distributed on various chromosomes. The bar chart represents the common and unique genes in the E2M and E2R analysis of the common pathways in the common genes. The blue bar shows the bar chart for the common pathway and the green bar for the pathway in which the genes are enriched in E2E. SMR. Results: Results of the analysis of DNAm. and SMR associations across DNAm, SNPs, and SNP variants are shown on the X-axis and the normalized gene expression Levels are shown in the Y-axis. The black bar shows log10P values of the association for the DNA.m probe cg

Document: processed_12886_2023_Article_2772-compressed.txt
Retinitis pig mentosa (RP) is an inheritable retinal disor - der with an estimated prevalence of 1 in 4000 ~ 5000 in t he global population. It can be inherited in an autosomal dominant (AD), autosomal recessive (AR), X-linked (XL), or digenic pattern. RP is caused by mutations in many genes. The final pathway of pathological change is apoptosis of the photoreceptor cells (PRC) and the retinal pigment epithe - lium (RPE) This degradation ultimately leads to structural changes in the whole retina. When the retina undergoes structural changes, the choroid, which is entirely com - posed of vascular tissue, may be involved in retinal ves - sel narrowing. In this study, we evaluated the anatomical change s in the retina and choroids in patients with autoso - mal dominant RP (ADRP) and X- linked RP (XLRP) Materials and methods Participants We conducted a retrospective study including thirty-two chil - dren (64 eyes) with RP and 28 age- and refraction-matched healt hy children (56 eyes) Patients with XLRP and ADRP who were under 12 years of age were recruited for this study. All participants underwent ophthalmologic exami - nations, including evaluations of best-corrected visual acuity using Sne llen charts. Refractive error was examined using a Welch Allyn VS100 apparatus. Full-field ERGs were recorded using the RETI-scan 21sys - tem (Roland company, Germany) according to the standards of the In ternational Society for Clinical Electrophysiology of Vision ( w ww. i scev. or g). Patients were excluded if they had more than 6 dioptres (D), hyperopia, cataracts, macedema or e piraracts because these factors might interfere with the accurate measurement of the retaloidal thicknesses. One section of the macular fovea and macular disc was averaged through the OCT acquisition mode (E DI) mode (Heberg lmbH) in GmbH, Germany. The duration of symptoms and onset age of XL RP and AD RP were matched (shown in Table 1) The diagnosis of RP was based on the following criteria: (1) reduction or extinction of electrophysiological responses recorded in an ERG and (2) typical fundus changes on reti - noscopic examination. The patients central vision may be preserved in the early stage but will decrease over time, ultimately resulting in complete blindness when cone cell function is lost entirely. Night blindness usually presents as an *Correspondence: Ningdong Li D epartment of Ophthalmology, Beijing Childrens Hospital, Capital Medical University, National Center for Childr ens Health, No.56 Nanlishi Road, Xicheng District, Beijing 100045, ChinaPage 2 of 9 BMC Ophthalmics 23:25 early symptom of RP, followed by a progressive contraction of the peripheral visual field. Children in the healthy control group had no e ye di seases except for some refractive errors. The study complied with the tenets of the Helsinki Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Beijing Chils Hospital - Chil drens Chil Drens (Chil Dulars - dils) Chil - Dular Dular, Dular matigaracts and Dular astigaract were excluded because they may interfere with accurate measurements of the eti - eti membrane, eti nal membrane, and eti eti sti n. Thi n eti s u sti stdy. Thi s stdy was obtained through OCT acquisition of the optic disc, averaged through a Spectralis apparatus with a wavelength of 870 nm (EDI) mode, composed of the optical disc, macovea

Document: processed_NRR-18-701.txt
This is an open access journal. All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this published article and its supplementary information files. This article is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons AttributionNonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 License, which allows others to remix, tweak, and build upon the work non-commercially. The author would like to thank the University of West Florida for their assistance with this study. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. In Europe, contact the National suicide Prevention Lifeline on 0845 90 90 95 or call the national suicide prevention helpline on 0844 90 90 100. In Australia, the Suicide Prevention Lifelink is in operation 24 hours a day, seven days a week, seven weeks a year. The National suicide prevention Lifeline is in action 12 hours a week. For more information on the Lifeline, visit the www.nsu.org/lifelink or call 1-888-947-9255. For information on how to help people in need of financial support, visit http://www.nhs.uk/helplink/. For information about how to donate to the Alzheimer’s Association, please visit http:/www.salk.org/. For more on the effects of aging on the eyes, see http:www.sciencemag.com/article/2013/04/24/science-researchers-in-aging-mice-retina-and-mammoth-receiving-eye-spinal-recovery.html. For details on the benefits of retinal degeneration, seehttp: www.sciencedirect.co.uk/. For a full list of the studies cited in this article, see: http: /www.sciencedirect.com/. For an overview of the findings, see the article:http:/ www.science-science.com:/news/2013-04-24/mammothenesis-retinas-retinal-degeneration-reproduction-reconciliation-reparatory-repertoire-rear-gene.html%. For a discussion on the role of Muller glia in the regeneration of the retina in aging, see http: / / www.skeptics.org:/skepticism.uk?articleId:1388/sbt.html#storylink=cpy. For a complete list of studies, please see:http://skepticalreview.com%. For the full article, click here. For the complete article, visit: http:// www.scientificresearch.com/?articleID:1378/srt.html+. For the entire article, please read the online version of this article. The online version includes the full version of the Open peer review report, as well as the Open Peer Review report, which includes the open peer review version, which is also available for free. To see the full copy of the report, please go to: http:\www.scientists.uk\/science/2014-04/14/scientific-reaper-review-report-open-peer-re-review.html?page=1. The full article also includes the Openpeer Review Report, which contains the full open peer-review report, and the full Open Peer review report for the study of the rd10 mouse. For. the full edition of the study, please click on the link to see the online edition of this issue, which has been published by the Society for Neuroscience and Neurophysiology and Neurosurgery.

Document: processed_41598_2021_Article_81093.txt
A retrospective analysis was performed including all IRD patients from our Spanish registry at the Fundacion Jimenez Diaz University Hospital (FJD, Madrid, Spain) from 1991 until August 2019. The complete cohort contains 6089 IRD affected cases (including index cases and affected relatives) belonging to 4403 unrelated families. Clinical diagnosis was based on ophthalmic examination, including measurement of best-corrected visual acuity, visual field testing, fundus examination and, if possible, full-field electroretinography. Information about the geographic origin of all the IRD cases from Spain was available in 4668. They are distributed throughout the 17 different Spanish communities. After molecular diagnosis, inherited patterns were reviewed and compared with a priori data of each family. Molecular studies were performed using different techniques as shown in Supplementary S8. According to the Spanish Statistical Office (INE in es) in January 2019 Genomic DNA samples were obtained from a total of 395 families (89 non-RP, 2083 non-syndromic RP and 577 syndromic families) The total number of cases diagnosed by the total population in Spain, published by the Spanish Genomic Office in 2019, was 577, including 12-791 non- RP, 20-89non-RP, 20-789 non/syndrome RP and 20-83 non/sporadic RP. Comparisons for each type of inheritance have also been made with the Fishers exact test in the NON-RP Unclassified subgroup and with the Chi-square test for the RP group. The results were published in 9 Vol.:(0123456789) Scientific Reports | 111526 |1526.1526, Castile and Leon and Castile-La Manadura, Extremadura. On the other hand, as we take into account other Spanish regions, there are other centers of reference and the data obtained are inconclusive for each clinical type of the disease. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the FJD under approval number 134/2016_FJD and fulfilled all the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki and its further reviews. A written informed consent form was obtained from all the patients or their legal guardians. We have a global comparison for which the significance level is the usual threshold of 0.05 and p-value is not corrected, and several post-hoc comparisons for which Bonferronis multiple comparisons adjustment is applied, multiplying the p-values by the number of comparisons. In this study, we performed a retrospective analysis of the largest cohort of patients with IRD from Spain, whom were recruited during a period of 28 years by a single center, the F JD. For NON- RP and RP families, an a Priori inheritance pattern was established according to previously described criteria1. Non-RP group include most patients with CD, CRD and achromatopsia. The subgroup of XL-RP also included choroideremia cases. For cases not extensively described in the first referral, a generic classification was made asNon-RP or RP. Criteria for Syndromic IRD diagnosis were previously described7,9. For non-SyndromIC IRD, and their clinical classification was done according toPreviously described criteria6,8. For RP group, a p equal to 0.497 was used with a p below 0.001. For Non- RP Unclassified Subgroup, Fishers same test was used in those cases in which more than 20% of expected values were below than 5, or at least one of the expected frequencies was below 1. The data sets were compared to assess the global association in the non/NON-RP subgroup. For the RP subgroup, the p level was 0.500 and for the Non/NONS subgroup it was equal to 1.0. We found no evidence of a link between IRD and non/nonsynd

Document: processed_1-s2.0-S1350946220300707-main-compressed.txt
Inherited retinal diseases are a frequent cause of blindness in pae - diatric and working age populations in many countries. The X-linked retinopathies represent an important, diverse subgroup, including both progressive and stationary conditions, and disorders with and without syndromic features. Pathogenic variants usually cause disease by loss of protein function hence these conditions are particularly attractive for gene-replacement strategies. There is a carrier phenotype in several of these conditions, which can help clinicians narrow the differential diagnosis and thereby mode of inheritance. Some of the disorders also illustrate ways in which variants in the same gene can generate a number of phenotypes, and potential limitations in current genetic sequencing methods awareness of the latter is particularly relevant as we enter the era of widely available whole genome sequencing and gene therapy. Exemplary findings on multimodal retinal imaging (including ultra-widefield fundus imaging, fundus autofluorescence (FAF) and spectral domain optical coherence tomography (OCT) are included for a many of these disorders. In vivo electro - physiology in patients is also discussed together with insights into the processes shaping the bright-flash electroretinogram (ERG) a-wave peak yielded by a consideration of recordings in complete CSNB. A selection of ERG parameters from a cohort of X- linked retinitis pigmentosa (XLRP) carriers is also presented. The final section highlights some algo - rithm mithm for deciding which genes to consider investigating for non-syndromic retin, and summarises current experimental approaches to therapy, as well as considering questions for future research. The article is available at ScienceDirect Progress in Retinal and Eye Research u{~zkw!s{yo|kro>! 1owoto~1m{y2w{mko2|~ooo~o! Received 2 March 2020 Received in revised form 7 August 2020 Accepted 21 August 2020 Progress in retinal and eye Research 82 100898 2Pathogenic variants in X- Linked Retinopathy (X-LR) usually cause. disease by losing protein function. Females inherit one XXX chromosome from each parent, whereas males inherit an autosomal chromosome (Charlesworth, 2000). It is believed that chromo - somalversions in XXX resulted in the first evolutionary events occurring between 240 and 320 million years ago (Lahnahn and Rahi, 2014, 2020 Solebo andRahi, 2017). X-LR is thought to be the most common cause of retinal blindness in young people. It is the second most common reason for blindness in older people. X- LR is the third most common genetic cause of vision loss in the elderly. It has been estimated that the majority of people with XLR are male-biased, with females more likely to be female-biased. XLR is the most commonly implicated genes, and the most frequently implicated genes are X, X, Y, and Y. The most frequently. implicated genes include X-R, X and Y, which are all linked to X-Linked retinopathy. We then discuss several genes in more detail as specified in the abstract. We conclude with a schematic showing sites of expression or impairment in the retina, and a summary of key clinical features, including how these sites are affected by X-linked retinal disease. The manuscript is available to be downloaded from ScienceDirect at: http://www.sciencedirect.com/retinal-research/x-linked-retinopathy-and-eye-disease/xlr/xr-researchers/xlr.html#xl. The. final message with a key message is that we are happy to provide a link to the ScienceDirect link for this article, and that we look forward to sharing our findings with others in the future. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457

Document: processed_nihms-1914935.txt
Ins2 expression in the RPE is regulated differently from systemic insulin. Ins2 was lower in MerTK KO mice, other growth factors were unaltered (false discovery rate (FDR)  0.5) Ins2 mRNA in primary cultured RPE cells (n = 6 mice) and control mouse embryonic fibroblasts ( n = 3). Schematic of RPE and photoreceptors (left). Representative image of three independent experiments showing Ins2 transcript (magenta) within RPE of mouse retina via confocal microscopy using RNAScope Multiplex-Fluorescent assay at 60 magnification (right). A scrambled nonsense negative probe was used as control. ELISA of insulin in protein lysates of R PE. Isolated eye cups (RPE/choroid/sclera) of WT mice were treated with KCl and supernatants were analyzed for C-peptide-2 by ELISA. Isotype antibody was used for immunofluorescence on mouse retina using anti-insulin or isotype-control antibody (red) and DAPI for cell nuclei (left) and RPE (appearing black due to pigment granules) Isolated nuclei of Rpe contain Ins2 RNA in Best1 -Cre/YFPflox-STOP-flox mice. ElISA for insulin synthesis in RPE in fed and starved (1014 h) conditions (left, b) and C- peptide cleavage in blood and protein lysis from starved mice (right) for fed (aditum and libitum) and starved mice. Glucose tolerance over time in starved and Ins2 KO mice for fed mice for starved RTPCR measuring circulating glucose levels over time (right, c, d) and Ins1 versus Ins2 in R PE (right), n = 4 mice per genotype. Glutathione levels in the blood of starved mice forfed and fed mice pergenotype (d, d, e) and insulins levels in starved mice perGenotype (e, f, g) forfed mice for starving RTPCr comparing Ins2 expression from RPE from fed or starved RT PCPR comparing Ins1 vs Ins2 from starved RPCR (right and c, c) and insulin levels in RPCRs for fed and starving mice per Genotype (left and right) For more details on this study, please see the Nat Metab article. For more information on the NatMetab article, please go to: http://www.nat.org/news/2013/08/23/2023-2023/ncat-metab-article.html#storylink=cpy. The article is also available in the online version of this article, as well as in the print version, which includes the abstract and a number of references. The online version includes the full text of the article and a bibliography of the study and an electronic version of the paper. For confidential support, call the National Institutes of Health (NIH) on 1-800-273-8255 or go to www.NIH.gov/NIT/NIC/NIM/NICT/NIP/NIN/Nip/Npin/Nim/N IMP.NIP.NIM.Nip.Npin.Nep.Npp.Nap.Np.Npn.Nup. Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors and Kamuvudines inhibit myloid-  induced retinal pigmented epithelium degeneration. The study was conducted on WT mice. The results were published in the journal Nat. Metab. Author manuscript available in PMC 2023 August 26. For the full version, please visit: http:www.nh.org/. For the print edition, visit:http: www.nia.

Document: processed_TJP-600-4623.txt
Keywords genetherapy,inheritedretinaldegenerations,optogenetics. Supporting information Additional supporting information can be found online in the SupportingInformationsectionattheendofthe HTMLviewof thearticle. Peer Review History: Peer review history is available: Peer Review history isavailable: peerreviewhistory.com. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255. For international support, call the European Association for the Study of Suicide (ESL) on 1+1+1 +1 +1+. For the UK, contact the National Institute of Health and Social Security on 1 800 273 8255 or visit the National Institute of Social Security and The Institution for the Study for the Study of the Study in England and Wales on 08457 90 90 90. For more information on the European Study of Suicide, see the European Study of Suicide and The Study in Europe. For the U.S., see the National Study of Suicide and The Study In Britain on 08457 100 000. For the UK, the study in the United States, the University of Suffolk and the University of London is available on the Clinical Psychology and Neuroendocrinology Department of England on the Clinical Clinical Trials Network (CSEN). For more details on the study's benefits, see the Clinical Trials and Monitoring Network (CSN) on the CSN. For further information about the study, visit the CSN Online Journal on CSN: http://www.csn.org/CSN/News/2013/01/07/13/science/genetherapy-inheriting-retinal degeneration and-optogenetic-rejuvenation. For a full list of the studies, see: CSN/2013-2013-13-13. For an overview of the researchers and their findings, see the CNS/2013 -14-13/study on optogenetics and optogenetic rejuvenations oncology-on-cnn. For details on how to receive a treatment that could help you see more clearly, visit: www.cns.org/. For a complete list of all the studies that have been published,  see: http www.cnc.org onCSN.org. For information on how to receiving a treatment could help you see more information about optogen recovery and/or expertise, including reconcipation and other treatments, such as recreational therapy, as well as exercises and treatments on how it can help you reproduce a person to see more of the same thing that helped you in the past, or how it can help you in future. For additional information, visit the Cochlear Research Site on http:www.skeptical research.com/cnn/ 2013/01 13/13.html and  http://www skeptics research site on Optogenetics-on cannabis-oncans.com/. For a complete list of studies that have been published and more, see

Document: processed_ijms-22-05684.txt
Next-generation sequencing (NGS) has been a common strategy employed in many countries to achieve this goal for several years. Over 270 genes have been associated with the aetiologies of IRDs. Mutations in disease genes may affect the retina in isolation, or may have more systemic effects. There are 80 systemic conditions with a retinal phenotype and 200 genes that not only affect retinal health but also the central nervous system, kidneys or heart. Such complexity makes it near-impossible for a diagnosis to be achieved in most instances solely on the basis of disease phenotype. We aim to provide an overview of the NGS strategies employed globally to maximise the detection of IRD-causing mutations. This includes the use of targeted gene panels for all IRD phenotypes or phenotypic subsets whole-exome sequencing (WES) whole-gene sequencing, whereby an IRD genes 50and 30sequences, exons and introns are interrogated. We also discuss bespoke methods to compliment other strategies, such as structural variant (SV) detection and copy number variant detection (CNV), among many others. Strategies currently under development to further improve diagnostic rates are reviewed herein, as are the approaches being employed to enable interpretation of novel coding and non-coding candidate variants. A wide array of methods to explore the functional effects of sequence variants have also been developed, and these are discussed. An overview to date of the findings to date is provided. An explanation of how these approaches have evolved is also provided. The review focuses on the various methods and strategies that are being implemented to elucidate the genetic pathogenesis ofIRDs and how they have evolved over the past few years. We conclude with a summary of the current state of the field. We hope that this will provide a useful tool for the treatment of rare inherited retinal diseases (IRDs) and the development of new treatments for IRDs and other retinal conditions. For example, some IRDotypes are associated with pathogenic variants in a very small number of genes, but some genes may be known to harbour deep-intronic variants, but may also harbour pathogenic deep-target variants in some genes, as well as those of those genes that are not known to be associated with IRD pathogenesis. For some IRDs, modifier loci have been identified, somewhat blurring the borders between Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021,22, 5684. In this case, adopting a TS approach would be more fruitful than WES for this purpose but would generate more off-target data on the IRD. We believe that adopting a WES approach for this use would also be significantly more fruitful but would require significantly greater analysis and storage and storage levels of data. The study was funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and is open-source, open-access and free-to-read. The authors thank the NIH for their support and assistance in the development and development of the study. For confidential support, call the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NICE) on 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.nci.nih.gov/ntid/intid/in/intelligent/intective/intrinsic/intl/intil.html. The author would like to thank the NICE for their assistance and support in the study, which has been described as ‘critical’ and ‘encouraging’. For more information on how to use NGS to identify IRDs in the future, please see the ‘How to Use NGS To Identify IRDs In The Future’ section of the online version of this article. The NGS approach is based on targeted sequencing (TS) and can be downloaded from the NIH’s Clinical Genomics Toolkit (CGP) page. In the U.S. and

Document: processed_IJO-70-2316.txt
Gene therapy involves gene supplementation/replacement or gene silencing. Cell replacement therapy is another strategy to replace dead or damaged retinal cells with cells derived from different sources including mesenchymal stem cells, peripheral or fetal RPE cells, human embryonic stem cells (hESCs), or humaninduced pluripotent stem cells. These therapies are delivered to the target tissues, namely the photoreceptors (PR) and RPE via subretinal, intravitreal, or suprachoroidal delivery systems. There are several limitations to these therapies, but they are expected to slow the disease progression and restore some visual functions. Further advances such as gene editing technologies are likely to result in more precise and personalized treatments. It is important to encourage patients to undergo gene testing and maintain a nationwide registry of IRDs. This article discusses the basics of gene therapy and cell therapy and their current status in the management of retinal dystrophies. For reprints contact: Rajani Battu, et al., et al.: Update on gene therapy for IRDs, July 2317, at: http://www.battu Eye Centre.org.uk/news/features/2013/07/2317/ update-on- gene-therapy-for-IRDs-July-2317.html. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or visit http:// www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. In the UK, call the helpline on 0800-788-9090 or click here. The Samaritans are a charity that provides support to people in need of confidential support in the UK and across the world. The National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is open to all ages and with a number of different support groups. For information on how to help, visit www. Samaritans. org.uk. For support on suicide matters in the United Kingdom, call 08457 909090. For help in the Netherlands, call 0800 709090 or visit the NHS Helpline, or the Samaritan Samaritans, in the country of your choice, see http:www.samarsitans.co.uk/. For support in Germany, call 1-844-744-9255 or the UK Samaritans,. For help on the road in the US, contact the National Health Service at http: www.nhs.org or the National Institute of Health and Welfare (NHS) in the USA. For. support on the Road to Recovery, visit http: http:/www.NHS.org/Road-to-Recovery/Roads-To-Reconstruction/Road2Reconciliation/RoadTo- Recovery/Road1-3-3/Road3-4/Road4-4-Road2-Roads. For more information about how to support the NHS in India, visit the National Eye Genetics and Research Centre, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India, or call the Centre for Eye Genetics & Research, Micon Fencing, 25/25, 1st Floor, Jakkur Plantation, Yashoda Nagar, Bengal Bangalore, Karn Bangalore, India. For details on the NHR in the Philippines, visit  http:http://www-NHS-India.gov/Eye-Genetics-and-Research- Centre-Karnataka/RoadRoads/Roadways/RoadS1-5/Road5-5-Road-1-1/Road7-5.html/. For. information on the UK in the UAE, see the National Institutes of Health (NIH) or the NICE in the Republic of Ireland (http:http:www

Document: processed_ijms-22-07207.txt
Inherited retinal diseases (IRDs) are a group of conditions that lead to a progressive loss of vision. Mutations in more than 250 different genes have been so far implicated as the cause of IRDs. The most common IRDs associated with severe visual impairment in childhood are Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) and early-onset severe retinal dystrophy (EORD) In 2017, voretigene neparvovec gene therapy was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of patients with confirmed biallelic RPE65 mutation-associated retinal Dystrophy and viable retinal cells. This article aims to review the evidence for the genetic basis of R PE65 -IRDs with a particular focus on the most appropriate approaches to molecular testing of patients that represent possible candidates for the Rpe65 -gene supplementation therapy. It is estimated that there are over 2.5 million individuals affected by IRDs worldwide, with RP being the most common form of the disease. In RP, the loss of photoreceptors, primarily in the peripheral retina, results in the appearance of pigment deposits Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021,22, 7207. In EORD, severe visual loss from birth or early infancy is characterized by wandering nystagmus, amaurotic pupils, and markedly reduced or non-recordable full-field electroretinograms. In the vast majority of cases, IRDs are autosomal recessive diseases. However, autosomal dominant inheritance pattern has been proposed by some authors in a small proportion of cases. The prevalence of LCA/EORD ranges from 1:30,000 to 1:80,000. On the other hand, the prevalence of RP accounts for approximately 5% to 5% of all IRDs with numbers ranging from 259 to 22%. It is difficult to accurately estimate RPE 65 mutation rates, as different patient populations, and lack of a common denominator or assessment methods, means that the exact number of patients affected is hard to estimate. In particular, between 21% and 54% of IRD patients have RP, and between 1:3000 and 1:4000 of EORD patients have EORD. In this study, the average age of onset of RP was 20 years old. The average age at disease onset for EORD was 16 years old, and the age at onset for RP was 19 years old and 20 years of age for both. The study participants were from the UK and the U.S., and the total number of participants in the IRD study was 2,715. The authors conclude that the current study was a success. The next step is to conduct further research to determine if there is a need for further studies to identify patients with IRDs that could be treated with RPE55 gene therapy. The results of this study will be published in the Journal of Retinitis pigmentosa (IRD) and EORD (RPE65 - IRDs) in the next issue of J Mol Mol Sci. Int. Mol Sci 2021, 22, 7223-22, 23. The final issue of the J Mol Sci will be released in the summer of 2021. The manuscript is titled, "Int. J Mol. Molsci. 2021, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, and 30, and includes the results of the study on RP, EORD and LCA /EORD in the first and second issues of the journal, as well as the results on the second and third issues. The journal will also publish a paper on the EORD - IRD in the journal of the European Medicines Agency (E.M.A.S.I.S.) and the European Journal of Ophthalmology (EMI) in August and September of the same year. For the full study, see

Document: processed_biomolecules-12-00455-compressed.txt
Inherited retinal degenerations (IRDs) typically result in progressive photoreceptor cell death, severe visual handicap, and blindness. The second messenger cyclic-guanosine-monophosphate (cGMP) has been found to play a central role in the pathobiology of many genetically distinct types of IRD. Excessive cGMP-signaling may be directly or indirectly associated with the activity of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), cyclic nucleotide-gated (CNG) channels, and calpain-type proteases. To investigate the possibility, we used speciO Ac inhibitors for PARP, calpain, and VGCC to block the contribution of the CNG channel via knockout of its beta subunit. Through these interventions, we show that high levels of PARP are part of the same pathway triggered by high cG MP levels in IRD and that this pathway controls the degenerative levels of calpain in photoreceptors and PAR2 in rods. We also show that PARP and cal pain could also regulate the mitochondrial Ca2+ homeostasis in primary neurons, suggesting that cGmp-dependent cell death could also occur during IRD-related crosstalk during PARP+calpain calk. We conclude that the PARP-calpain pathway could also be involved in the nonapoptotic cell death PKG HDAC Photoreceptor degeneration in retinitis pigmentosa (RP) Patients with RP experience night blindness and gradual constriction of the visual O Aeld due to primary loss of rod photoresceptors. This is followed by secondary degeneration Biomolecules 2022, 12, 455. About one in four thousand people are affected by RP, which is generally considered to be untreatable. In IRD, PARP has been suggested to be part of two independent cell death subroutines, both of which are triggered by elevated levels of c GMP. On the other hand, a cleaved PARP is known to be cleaved in rat models, indicating that calpain could potentially control PARP activity via a mitochondrial toxicity in rat NMDA neurons, as well as in rat rat models for primary cortical neurons, to regulate the calpain activity via Mitochondrial Ca2+. We show that a knockout PARP was found to control the cal pain activity via mitochondrial Ca 2+homeostasis and Mitochondrias Ca2-ostasis. In humans, 4 to 5% ofIRD patients carry mutations in PDE6 genes, making it seem likely that they will also suffer from high CGMP levels and the corresponding up-regulation of downstream cG MPs. In the rd1mouse (retinal degeneration 1), a naturally occurring mouse model O Arst described by Keeler in the early 1920s, the degeneration of rods is associated with a prominent activation of both PARP & calpain. The inO Cux of CNG channels and/or VGCC is thought to cause the activation of Calpain- type proteases, which may promote cell destruction. The activation of C NG channels leads to a depolarization of the photore receptor plasma membrane, increasing the synaptic and cytosolicCa2+levels. This leads to primary rod cell death and secondary cone photoreceptive cell loss in RP. Inrd1mice, the gene encoding for the beta subunits of the rod photoreception-speciOAc phosphodiesterase-6 (PDE6) is mutated, causing PDE 6 dysfunction, causing primary rod death, followed bysecondary cone Photoreceptor degeneration. The authors show that knockout of this subunit of PDE6 leads to the destruction of the rods in RP and the loss of the cone photoresceptor. They also show the knockout of the betasubunit of PE6 causes the loss

Document: processed_PIIS0039625723001030.txt
Methods of literature search We conducted a systemic Medline database search on PubMed (October 10, 2022 ) using the following MeSH headings. We identified further articles from the reference lists of the retrieved articles. This review primarily relied on articles written in English. We reviewed non-English language articles that had abstracts translated. The authors report no commercial or proprietary interest in any product or concept discussed in this article. Patients have given consent for these images to be used in a prospective study approved by the Human Research Ethics Office of the University of Western Australia (2021/ET000151). Funding information This study was supported by the National Health & Medical Research Council of Australia (project and fellowship grant numbers: GNT1116360 (FKC) and MRF1142962 (FKc), the McCusker Foundation (FK) and the Miocevich Retina Fellowship (RCHJ), and the Telethon Trust (FK c) The authors declare no competing interest in the products or concepts discussed in the article. Back to Mail Online home.Back to the page you came from.. The study was published in the journal Ophthalmics, a peer-reviewed, open-access journal published by the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Australia. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. The author's website is www.samaritans.org. For more information on how to get involved in the study, please visit the Ophthalmic Society of Australia’s website. For information on the Australian Retinitis P pigmentosa Foundation, visit the Australian retinitis pigmentosa Association. For details on the National Institute of Health and Welfare, visit www.nis.org/retinitis-pigmentosa. For further information, please go to the National Institutes of Health’S Retina Pigmentosystems website or visit the Retina Institute of Australia and New Zealand. for more information. For the U.S. Institute of Ophthalmology, see the American Retina Association. for details on retinal angiomatous proliferation in a variant of retinitic pigmentosa (RAP). For the UK, the British Retina Society has published a paper on the same topic. for the first time this year. for a variety of reasons. The U.K. and Ireland have published a study on the link between outer retinal degeneration and choriocapillaris loss in stargardt disease (STD) for the second time. For. the third time, a study has been published on the relationship between STD and outer retina degeneration in a patient with RPE65-related chorioretinal dystrophy (RPE65) For the fourth time, the authors have used the term ‘stargardT disease’ to refer to a patient who has suffered from the disease for more than a decade. For this study, they used the terms ‘retinal angioid streaks’ and ‘angioid streak’ in the title of the study. For a second time, they cited the study as the reason for their decision to use the ‘STD’ label. For these reasons, they also used the “STD-related’ term in the second article. This article has been amended to reflect that the study was based on a different type of retinal dystrophy. for which there is no evidence of a link between the two conditions. The article also includes a “stark’ or “pink’” effect on the etiology of the disease, which has been shown to be ‘pink-like’ rather than “black and white” in the current study. The final article was published on October 10, 2012.

Document: processed_jcm-12-06953.txt
Inherited retinal dystrophies (IRDs) encompass a diverse group of disorders affecting the structure and function of the retina. The genetic and clinical heterogeneity of these rare disorders can make diagnosis and prognosis challenging. Electrophysiological tests can help characterize IRDs by identifying the site of damage but also the cell type involved in the visual degenerative process. The oscillatory potentials (OPs) response reflects the interactions between bipolar cells, amacrine cells, and ganglion cells. The mfERG has also been used to assess the loss of cone function in the macula and peripheral regions of the retinal. In addition to clinical assessments, such as visual acuity, contrast sensitivity test, and visual field test, electrophysiology testing provides a unique objective evaluation of retinal function, which is critical for prognosis and treatment. The results of this study were published in the Journal of the International Society for Clinical ElectrophYSiology of Vision (ISCEV) and published online in the U.S. by J. Clin. Med. 2023,12, 6953. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support in the UK, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. For more information, visit the website of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCG) in London, England, or click here to go to the website for the RCG in the United Kingdom (UK). For confidential help, contact the National Institute of Health and Human Services (NICE) in the US on 1-844-788-9090 or the National Institutes of Health in the USA on 888-738-9088. For information on the NICE in-depth retinal assessment program, visit www.nih.org/retinal-assessment-program. For details on how to get started, or to get involved, go to www.ncg.gov/retina/. For more on the NCI in the Netherlands, see the National Council for Retina Research (NCR) and the Netherlands Institute of Retina Care (NIC). For more details on the UNC on-going NICE program, see http:// www.rcn.org in the Netherlands and the UK. for more information on how the NCR can help people with retina problems to improve their vision and care for their family members and loved ones, or visit the NIC website. For the UK and the rest of the world, the NSC in the North America, the UK is the leading authority on retina care, with more than 1,000 publications on the topic. The NSC offers a wide range of tests to assess retina function, including electroretinogram, electrooculogram, pattern electroret inogram (PERG), and visual evoked potential (VEP) tests. The VEP test measures the electrical activity of cells in the retina in response to brief flashes of light. The ERG test is a widely used assessment for generalized retinalfunction that measures mass electrophyiological response to flash strengths of 0.01, 3, and 10 photcd orthern. The two LA ERGs are the responses to a flash strength of 3 photcd, superimposed on a light-adapting background (luminance 30 cd orthernmatari2) as single flashes (LA 3 ERG) and to 30 Hz flicker (LA 30-Hz ERG), respectively, respectively, in which a delayed time response suggests generalized cone dysfunction and reduced amplitude with normal peak time and is indicative of restricted cone dysfunction. A negative N95 peak, which indicates macular function, and a negative

