ARTICLE
Retinal gene therapy in RPE-65 gene mediated inherited retinal
dystrophy
Assad Jalil1✉, Tsveta Ivanova1, George Moussa1, Neil R. A. Parry1,2and Graeme C. M. Black1
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to The Royal College of Ophthalmologists 2022
BACKGROUND: Voretigene neparvovec (VN) is a gene therapeutic agent for treatment of retinal dystrophies caused by bi-allelic
RPE65 mutations. We illustrate, both the bene ﬁts and pitfalls associated with ocular gene therapy in the same patient.
METHODS: Two eyes of one patient with bi-allelic RPE65 mutations have been treated with VN. The clinical examinations included
visual acuity (VA, in normal and low luminance), colour vision, contrast sensitivity, International Society for ClinicalElectrophysiology of Vision (ISCEV) standard retinal electrophysiology and dark-adapted full- ﬁeld stimulus threshold (FST),
Goldmann VF analysis and imaging studies, including optical coherence tomography (OCT) and auto ﬂuorescence. These were
performed at baseline, 2-weeks, 3 and 6-months, 1 and 2-years follow-up.RESULTS: Theﬁrst eye showed improvement in rod photoreceptor function with increased peripheral and low luminance vision
(baseline VA: 0.9 logMAR and 2-years post-operative VA: 0.7 logMAR). The second eye, whilst showing increased light sensitivity,
suffered a drop in central vision (at 2-weeks) with loss of foveal photoreceptors as shown by the loss of ellipsoid zone on OCT scan(baseline VA: 0.6, 2-year post-operative VA: 1.2). FST improvements were maintained in both eyes indicating a sustained ef ﬁcacy of
VN with little waning of its effect.
CONCLUSIONS: We present a previously unreported adverse complication of subretinal VN therapy in bi-allelic RPE65, indicating a
probable immune response in treatment of the second eye, resulting in loss of foveal photoreceptors. This case-series highlightsthe potential and pitfalls of retinal gene therapy in the same patient. The immune responses of the body to a ‘foreign vector ’,
remains a challenge.
Eye (2023) 37:1874–1877; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41433-022-02262-5
INTRODUCTION
Inherited retinal dystrophies (IRD) are a group of rare conditions
characterised by severe vision loss that result from pathogenic
variation in any one of more than 220 different genes [ 1]. One
such gene is RPE65 which encodes all-trans retinyl ester isomerase,
an enzyme critical to the visual cycle. Biallelic pathogenic variants
inRPE65 cause a spectrum of severe rod-mediated IRDs, including
Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) type 2 and retinitis pigmentosa(RP) type 20 [ 2]. Commonly, patients experience nyctalopia from
early childhood, and progressive loss of visual ﬁeld (VF) and visual
acuity (VA). LCA type 2 is more severe, patients presenting in
infancy with absent ﬁxation, nystagmus, nyctalopia and progres-
sive severe visual loss [ 3]. RP type 20 is variable, usually starting
later in childhood with peripheral visual loss that eventually
progresses to involve central vision. Over time, all patients withRPE65 mutation-induced IRD have severe loss of light perceptionat any intensity along with profound reduction in navigational
vision [ 4].
The role of gene augmentation therapy in RPE65 mediated
disease was studied in two open-label phase one studies, and onerandomised controlled phase three trial [ 5–7]. Overall, the trials
reported a consistent improvement in navigational vision, light
sensitivity and visual ﬁelds. Consequently, the treatment of IRDsreached an in ﬂection point in December 2017, when the US Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) approved Voretigene Neparvovec
(VN, Luxturna
®, Spark Therapeutics, Philadelphia, PA) for patients
with IRD caused by biallelic RPE65 mutation, the ﬁrst ever FDA-
approved gene therapy. VN treatment is now offered worldwide inselected ocular gene therapy centres. The real-world data that are
being gathers increase our understanding of the vast potential of
gene therapy whilst highlighting the associated risks in somecases. The case presented here illustrates both the bene ﬁts and
pitfalls associated with ocular gene therapy in the same patient.
METHODS
Following a search on our genetic database, a 39-year-old Caucasian male
with a pathogenic biallelic RPE65 mutation (Fig. 1) was identi ﬁed and
invited for a clinic visit to discuss the new treatment option of VN. A
comprehensive ophthalmic examination was carried out and patient
underwent a battery of base line investigations. Other than IRD, he had noocular or medical history to note.
Baseline investigations
At baseline the patient ’s VA (under normal and low luminance), colour
vision, and contrast sensitivity were tested using natural pupils. He
Received: 11 August 2022 Revised: 13 August 2022 Accepted: 12 September 2022
Published online: 26 September 20221Manchester Royal Eye Hospital, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9WL, UK.2Division of Pharmacy and Optometry, School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and
Health, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.✉email: assad.jalil@mft.nhs.ukwww.nature.com/eye1234567890();,:underwent International Society for Clinical Electrophysiology of Vision
standard retinal electrophysiology and dark-adapted full- ﬁeld stimulus
threshold (FST), Goldmann VF analysis and imaging studies, includingoptical coherence tomography (OCT) and auto ﬂuorescence.
There are three criteria to be met for the patient to be considered for VN
treatment in the United Kingdom: [ 8]
1. Presence of viable retina (At least 100 microns central retinal
thickness on OCT scan)
2. Three or more optic disc areas without atrophy or pigmentary
degeneration within posterior pole of the retina
3. A remaining VF within 30° of ﬁxation.
The patient met all the criteria and was offered treatment. After a
detailed discussion of all the risks and bene ﬁts of VN, the patient wished to
proceed, and informed consent was taken. It was decided to treat his lefteyeﬁrst, which had the worse VA and VF.
Surgical procedure and treatment protocol
Three days prior to administration of the gene therapy, the patient was
started on oral steroids as per the protocol (prednisone at one mg/kg/day,maximum of 40 mg/day for a total of 7 days, starting 3 days beforeadministration of Voretigene Neparvovec, followed by a tapering dose for10 days) [ 7]. The surgery consisted of 25 G pars plana vitrectomy (PPV),
subretinal injection of 0.3 ml of VN, ﬂuid air exchange and closure of all
surgical ports with 8/0 vicryl. There were no complications during theprocedure. Following the operation, the patient was advised to maintainsupine position for 24 h and was prescribed topical prednisolone 1% fourtimes daily for 4 weeks; topical cyclopentolate 1% twice daily for 2 weeksand topical chloramphenicol 0.5% four times daily for 2 weeks (standardpractise following PPV).
RESULTS
At baseline, we report, logMAR VA was 0.6 (right) and 0.9 (left).
Under low photopic illumination, VA was 1.2 (right) and 1.46 (left),and he could not see the chart under mesopic illumination.Ganzfeld electroretinograms (ERGs) were extinguished in both
eyes; multifocal ERGs did not show any recordable signal from any
location in the central 60°. FST mean thresholds were −2.32 dB for
the right and −2.29 dB for the left eye respectively. OCT and VF
were also carried out to determine patient eligibility.
Early in the postoperative period, the patient started noticing
increased light sensitivity and improved low luminance naviga-
tion. Two weeks following surgery, he developed left-sided cystoidmacular oedema (Fig. 2), which showed little improvement with
steroid eye drops but settled completely on a short 2-week course
of oral steroids. VA remained at 0.8 for the left eye a month after
surgery. After careful consideration, with the patient reportingmarked improvement in light sensitivity and low luminance vision,
it was decided to proceed with the surgery of the second eye. The
procedure of the right eye was uneventful with no complicationsand was covered with a 17-day course of perioperative oralsteroids as before.
In the early postoperative period following the second surgery,
the patient again noted a signi ﬁcant improvement in low
luminance and navigational vision. However, at 2 weeks post-surgery, he reported a sharp decrease in central vision. At this
point, VA of the right eye had dropped from 0.6 preoperatively to
hand movements. OCT showed signi ﬁcant cystoid macular
oedema, worse than in the left eye. Oral prednisolone, which
would have been stopped at 2 weeks post-surgery, was increased
to 40 mg and continued on a tapering dose for another 4 weeks.The macular oedema of the right eye completely resolved by6 weeks after surgery and the VA, although showing some
improvement, remained considerably lower at 1.2 compared to
preoperative levels of 0.6. By now, OCT showed complete loss ofthe ellipsoid zone (EZ) localised to the fovea, and not the entiresurgical bleb size (Fig. 3). EZ is linked to photoreceptor layer
integrity and is a marker of central visual function. Foveal EZ loss is
a previously unreported adverse effect of gene therapy.
At the 3-month follow-up after the second eye ’s surgery, the
patient underwent further tests. Low luminance VA showed
Fig. 1 Fundus picture of the patient. Retinal vascular attenuation and pigmentary changes with bone spicule-like pigment deposition.
Pre-surgery Two-weeks post-surgery
Three-months post-surgery Six-months post-surgery
Fig. 2 OCT of the left eye. Marked cystoid macular oedema at
2 weeks which settled with oral steroids, and no change in thecentral ellipsoid zone as shown by subsequent scans.
Pre-surgery Two-weeks post-surgery
Three-months post-surgery Six-months post-surgery
Fig. 3 OCT of the right eye. Marked cystoid macular oedema at
2 weeks which settled with oral steroids, but resulted in permanentloss of central ellipsoid zone as shown by subsequent scans.A. Jalil et al.
1875
Eye (2023) 37:1874 – 1877signi ﬁcant improvement in the left eye of 0.2 log units at 85 cd m2
and by 0.45 at 5.4 cd m2. Furthermore, the patient could now see
the mesopic (0.35 cd m−2) chart, with VA of 1.32. The right eye, as
expected, showed reduced central acuity. FST showed marked
improvement in scotopic sensitivity, by a factor of 10 (one log
unit) in the right eye and by a factor of 16 (1.2 log unit) in the lefteye (Fig. 2). Hence there was improvement in rod photoreceptor-
mediated retinal sensitivity in both eyes, with improvement of VA
in the left eye as well, but reduction in central vision in the right
eye due to loss of foveal photoreceptors.
Further follow up at 6 months, 1 year and 2 years showed stable
vision of 1.2 logMAR in the right and 0.7 logMAR in the left eye.
FST improvements were maintained in both eyes indicating a
sustained ef ﬁcacy of VN with little waning of its effect (Fig. 4).
DISCUSSION
In 1972, Theodore Friedman and Richard Roblin laid thefoundation of gene therapy in their ground-breaking article in
the journal Science, writing: ‘In our view, gene therapy may
ameliorate some human genetic diseases in the future ’[9]. There
was slow progress in this ﬁeld until 2017, when interest in gene
therapy suddenly exploded, with US FDA approving three gene
therapy products including VN, the ﬁrst approved gene therapy
treatment for patients with IRD caused by biallelic RPE65mutation.
VN, being a subretinal gene therapy requires a surgical
procedure (vitrectomy) and subretinal injection for administration.Safety and ef ﬁcacy of VN and its route of administration have
been studied in 40 patients in the phase 1 follow-on and phase
3 studies [ 10]. The safety pro ﬁle of the drug was considered to be
consistent with vitrectomy and the subretinal injection procedure.Twenty-seven patients (68%) had ocular treatment-emergentadverse events, mostly mild. Two serious ocular adverse events
occurred resulting in irreversible visual loss, both attributable to
the surgical procedure: one patient had macular atrophy and theother developed endophthalmitis and increased intraocularpressure leading to optic atrophy. Three patients (7.5%) had
ocular in ﬂammation which settled without any sequelae. There
were no drug-related serious adverse events or severe immuneresponses.
Since the original trials, the real-world data on the ef ﬁcacy and
safety of VN is gradually trickling in ref. [ 11], and a post-
authorisation multi-centre study, PERCEIVE, collecting safety datafor 5 years after treatment with VN, is currently underway. In this
backdrop, we present our unique case which shows the success
and risks of retinal gene therapy in the same patient.
Theﬁrst eye of our patient shows an excellent outcome in all
visual parameters following treatment with VN. IRD due to RPE65
mutation is rod-mediated, so VA is not a true marker of diseaseprogression. FST is a sensitive global measure of dark-adaptedsensitivity to light and hence photoreceptor function. In addition,
it correlates well with navigation under dim illumination [ 10].
There was a signi ﬁcant improvement in FST in the left eye in our
patient by a factor of 16, which corresponded with the subjectiveimprovement noted by the patient and was also re ﬂected in low-
luminance VA gains. Furthermore, photopic VA, which is a foveal
cone-mediated function, improved by 0.2 logMAR units. This maybe a secondary consequence of improved cone health due to
RPE65 gene augmentation. OCT revealed mild in ﬂammatory
macular oedema 2 weeks after surgery; this spared the photo-receptor layer. This could have been a postoperative in ﬂammatory
response to the surgery, which normally develops later. As
subsequent events showed, it is more likely that this was an
immune response to the drug. This is in contrast to the type-1 cell-mediated effector immunity response that has been previouslyimplicated with subretinal gene therapy in murine eyes [ 12], Either
way, a temporary increase in oral steroids immediately settled the
macular oedema and the photoreceptor layer at the fovearemained unaffected. The improvement in visual function in this
eye was sustained at 2 years of follow-up, an outcome clearly
indicating the vast potential of gene therapy in IRD.
Whilst progress was initially similar, the second eye followed a
different trajectory. The patient noticed improvement in light
sensitivity, which was picked up by the FST, but at 2 weeks post-
surgery noticed a signi ﬁcant fall in VA. There was marked macular
oedema coming up to the EZ, showing the involvement ofphotoreceptors. The macular oedema responded to an immediate
increase in oral steroids, but by the time the retinal layers settled,
there was loss of foveal photoreceptors. The fact that the macular
oedema was worse in the second eye indicates previous immunesensitisation, and it was steroid-responsive, both factors pointing
to an immune-mediated aetiology. This resulted in loss of central
foveal function. Such a complication of VN treatment has not beenreported before. Although mechanical damage to the other
segment resulting from surgical retinal detachment is well
recognised [ 13], this is typically time dependent [ 14] and unlikely
to cause the structural changes observed on the OCT after such a0 100 200 300 400 500 600 7000.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0R
 LLog CS
Day0 100 200 300 400 500 600 7001.81.61.41.21.00.80.60.4 85R
 85L
5.4R
 5.4L
 0.35R
 0.35LLogMAR
Day0 100 200 300 400 500 600 7000-2-4-6-8-10-12-14-16-18R
 LThreshold (dB)
Day
Fig. 4 Baseline and post-surgical measures of visual function. Dates of surgery are indicated with red (right eye) and green (left eye)
triangles. aContrast sensitivity measured using a Pelli-Robson chart at 1 m distance under photopic (85 cd m−2) illumination. bDistance-
corrected LogMAR VA measured at 1 m on a 3 m EDTRS chart under photopic (85 cd m−2), low photopic (5.4 cd m−2) and mesopic
(0.35 cd m−2) illumination using neutral density ﬁlters. Patient could not see the mesopic chart with the right eye at any time. cFST thresholds
in dB where 0 dB =0.01 cd s m−2and 1 dB =0.1 log units.A. Jalil et al.
1876
Eye (2023) 37:1874 – 1877short duration of detachment necessary to administer the VN.
Additionally, the loss of ellipsoid zone was localised to the fovea,
rather than the whole retina that was detached in the
surgical bleb.
Severe immune responses have always been a danger with
retinal gene therapy and thus the original trials used a
perioperative immunomodulatory regimen. The vector was
optimised to remove the empty capsids from the ﬁnal product
[7]. The surgical technique which we used was completely
according to protocol and had innovations to reduce the risk of
vector-related adverse events. VN was administered subretinally
through a single 41-gauge retinotomy to reduce the egress of thedrug into the vitreous cavity, a further vitrectomy was done afterdrug administration to remove escaped capsids, and all vitreous
ﬂuid was removed at the end by carrying out a ﬂuid-air exchange.
Despite all this, loss of foveal photoreceptors due to a presumedimmune response was detected. One option in such cases may be
the use of increased immunomodulation for the second eye by a
higher and more prolonged course of oral steroids if aninﬂammatory response is seen in the ﬁrst eye.
Our case is unique in that it highlights the potential and pitfalls
of retinal gene therapy in the same patient. The future is
promising but challenges remain, especially the immuneresponses of the body to a ‘foreign vector ’. As further evidence
comes in and more gene-based therapies become available, we
willﬁnd better and safer ways to deliver gene therapy, whilst
minimising the associated risks, in our pursuit of ﬁnding the
ultimate cure for hereditary diseases.
Summary
What was known before
●Immune response to the body as a ‘foreign vector ’,i sa
signi ﬁcant challenge in gene therapy.
●Voretigene neparvovec (VN) is a gene therapeutic agent for
treatment of retinal dystrophies caused by bi-allelic RPE65
mutations.
What this study adds
●We present a previously unreported adverse complication of
subretinal VN therapy in bi-allelic RPE65, indicating a probable
immune response in treatment of the second eye, resulting inloss of foveal photoreceptors.
●This case highlights the bene ﬁt and pitfalls of retinal gene
therapy in the same patient.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The raw data are available upon reasonable request.
REFERENCES
1. RetNet. Summaries of genes and loci causing retinal diseases. 2016. https://
sph.uth.edu/retnet/sum-dis.htm . Accessed 10 Apr 2017.
2. Thompson DA, Gyürüs P, Fleischer LL, Bingham EL, McHenry CL, Apfelstedt-Sylla
E, et al. Genetics and phenotypes of RPE65 mutations in inherited retinaldegeneration. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2000;41:4293 –9.
3. den Hollander AI, Roepman R, Koenekoop RK, Cremers FPM. Leber congenital
amaurosis: genes, proteins and disease mechanisms. Prog Retinal Eye Res.2008;27:391 –419.
4. Cideciyan AV. Leber congenital amaurosis due to RPE65 mutations and its
treatment with gene therapy. Prog Retinal Eye Res. 2010;29:398 –427.5. Maguire AM, High KA, Auricchio A, Wright JF, Pierce EA, Testa F, et al. Age-
dependent effects of RPE65 gene therapy for Leber ’s congenital amaurosis: a
phase 1 dose-escalation trial. Lancet. 2009;374:1597 –605.
6. Bennett J, Wellman J, Marshall KA, McCague S, Ashtari M, DiStefano-Pappas J,
et al. Safety and durability of effect of contralateral-eye administration of AAV2
gene therapy in patients with childhood-onset blindness caused by RPE65mutations: a follow-on phase 1 trial. Lancet. 2016;388:661 –72.
7. Russell S, Bennett J, Wellman JA, Chung DC, Yu ZF, Tillman A, et al. Ef ﬁcacy and
safety of voretigene neparvovec (AAV2-hRPE65v2) in patients with RPE65-mediated inherited retinal dystrophy: a randomised, controlled, open-label,
phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2017;390:849 –60.
8. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence; Voretigene neparvovec for
treating inherited retinal dystrophies caused by RPE65 gene mutations. NationalInstitute for Health and Care Excellence. 2019.
9. Friedmann T, Roblin R. Gene therapy for human genetic disease? Science.
1972;175:949 –55.
10. Maguire AM, Russell S, Wellman JA, Chung DC, Yu ZF, Tillman A, et al. Ef ﬁcacy,
safety, and durability of voretigene neparvovec-rzyl in RPE65mutation –associated inherited retinal dystrophy: results of phase 1 and 3 trials.
Ophthalmology. 2019;126:1273 –85.
11. Deng C, Zhao PY, Branham K, Schlegel D, Fahim AT, Jayasundera TK, et al. Real-
world outcomes of voretigene neparvovec treatment in pediatric patients withRPE65-associated Leber congenital amaurosis. Graefe ’s Arch Clin Exp Ophthal-
mol. 2022;260:1543 –50.
12. Chandler LC, McClements ME, Yusuf IH, Martinez-Fernandez de la Camara C,
MacLaren RE, Xue K. Characterizing the ce llular immune response to subretinal AAV
gene therapy in the murine retina. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2021;22:52 –65.
13. Ghazi NG, Green WR. Pathology and pathogenesis of retinal detachment. Eye.
2002;16:411 –21.https://www.nature.com/articles/6700197 . Accessed 15 May 2022.
14. Guerin CJ, Anderson DH, Fariss RN, Fisher SK. Retinal reattachment of the primate
macula. Photoreceptor recovery after short-term detachment. Investig Ophthal-mol Vis Sci. 1989;30:1708 –25.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors have made substantial contributions to the following: (1) the conception
and design of the study, or acquisition of data, or analysis and interpretation of data,
(2) drafting the article or revising it critically for important intellectual content, (3)ﬁnal approval of the version to be submitted.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
ETHICS STATEMENT
As this was a retrospective anonymized study, as per our local protocol from our
Clinical Effectiveness Department, and as per national guidelines from the National
Code of Clinical Research, and the Health Research Authority (HRA), this study has
ethical approval exemption and no patient consent was required for participation. Allprocedures were completed prior to the design of this study. Patients werediagnosed and treated according to local guidelines and agreements and writtenconsent from patients was acquired prior to all procedures as clinically indicated. Thisstudy does not report on the use of new or experimental protocols.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Assad Jalil.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
Publisher ’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing
agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of theaccepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of suchpublishing agreement and applicable law.A. Jalil et al.
1877
Eye (2023) 37:1874 – 1877