Citation: Le, V .; Abdelmessih, G.;
Dailey, W.A.; Pinnock, C.; Jobczyk, V .;
Rashingkar, R.; Drenser, K.A.; Mitton,
K.P . Mechanisms Underlying Rare
Inherited Pediatric Retinal Vascular
Diseases: FEVR, Norrie Disease,
Persistent Fetal Vascular Syndrome.
Cells 2023, 12, 2579. https://doi.org/
10.3390/cells12212579
Academic Editor: Takeshi Iwata
Received: 14 September 2023
Revised: 28 October 2023
Accepted: 30 October 2023
Published: 5 November 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
cells
Review
Mechanisms Underlying Rare Inherited Pediatric Retinal
Vascular Diseases: FEVR, Norrie Disease, Persistent Fetal
Vascular Syndrome
Vincent Le1,2, Gabrielle Abdelmessih1, Wendy A. Dailey1, Cecille Pinnock1, Victoria Jobczyk1,
Revati Rashingkar2, Kimberly A. Drenser1,3,* and Kenneth P . Mitton1,2,*
1Eye Research Institute, Oakland University, Rochester, MI 48309, USA
2Oakland University William Beaumont School of Medicine, Rochester, MI 48309, USA
3Associated Retinal Consultants P .C., Royal Oak, MI 48073, USA
*Correspondence: kdrenser@arcpc.net (K.A.D.); mitton@oakland.edu (K.P .M.); Tel.: +1-248-370-2079 (K.P .M.)
Abstract: Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy (FEVR), Norrie disease, and persistent fetal vascular
syndrome (PFVS) are extremely rare retinopathies that are clinically distinct but are uniﬁed by
abnormal retinal endothelial cell function, and subsequent irregular retinal vascular development
and/or aberrant inner blood-retinal-barrier (iBRB) function. The early angiogenesis of the retina
and its iBRB is a delicate process that is mediated by the canonical Norrin Wnt-signaling pathway
in retinal endothelial cells. Pathogenic variants in genes that play key roles within this pathway,
such as NDP, FZD4, TSPAN12, andLRP5, have been associated with the incidence of these retinal
diseases. Recent efforts to further elucidate the etiology of these conditions have not only highlighted
their multigenic nature but have also resulted in the discovery of pathological variants in additional
genes such as CTNNB1, KIF11, and ZNF408, some of which operate outside of the Norrin Wnt-
signaling pathway. Recent discoveries of FEVR-linked variants in two other Catenin genes (CTNND1,
CTNNA1) and the Endoplasmic Reticulum Membrane Complex Subunit-1 gene (EMC1) suggest that
we will continue to ﬁnd additional genes that impact the neural retinal vasculature, especially in
multi-syndromic conditions. The goal of this review is to brieﬂy highlight the current understanding
of the roles of their encoded proteins in retinal endothelial cells to understand the essential functional
mechanisms that can be altered to cause these very rare pediatric retinal vascular diseases.
Keywords: FEVR; Norrie disease; persistent fetal vascular syndrome; norrin; NDP; FZD4; LRP5;
TSPAN12; ZNF408; KIF11; CTNND1; CTNNA1; ECM1; retinal endothelial cell; retinal vasculature;
blood-brain-barrier; genetic disease mechanisms
1. Introduction
The retinal endothelial cell (REC) plays a central role in the developmental formation
of the mammalian neural-retinal vasculature [ 1]. A retinal speciﬁc growth factor, Norrin, is
essential for stimulating the proliferation of the retinal vasculature and recruitment of mural
cells [ 2]. Genetic variants that change normal REC function can potentially impact the
development of the entire neural retina and its function. At maturity, three interconnected
microvascular beds support the inner neural retina: the Superﬁcial Plexus in the Ganglion
Cell Layer (GCL)/Nerve Fiber Layer interface, the Intermediate Plexus on the inner-side
of the Inner Nuclear Layer (INL), and the Deep Plexus on the outer-side of the INL. See
Figure 1. We recommend the review by Selvam et al. (2017) for those interested in the topic
of retinal vascular development [3].
Cells 2023, 12, 2579. https://doi.org/10.3390/cells12212579 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/cellsCells 2023, 12, 2579 2 of 20
1 
  
Figure 1. Location of the inner-Blood-Retinal-Barrier (iBRB) and retinal endothelial cells. The neural
retina comprises several distinct layers. In the orientation of this diagram, light enters from the top
and passes through the retinal layers to reach rod and cone opsins in the outer segments (OS) of
photoreceptors. Photoreceptor nuclei form the Outer Nuclear Layer (ONL). Photoreceptor cells form
synaptic connections with downstream inter-neurons in the Outer Plexiform Layer (OPL). Nuclei of
Bipolar Cells, Horizontal Cells, and some Amacrine Cells comprise the Inner Nuclear Layer (INL).
In the Inner Plexiform Layer, the Bipolar and Amacrine Cells form synaptic contacts with Ganglion
Cells in the Ganglion Cell Layer (GCL). An Inner-Limiting Membrane (ILM) lays on top of the
retina and the superﬁcial plexus. Two different blood supplies support the neural retina and both
have a high-barrier character, which are collectively the Blood-Retinal-Barrier (BRB). The outer-BRB
(oBRB) sustains photoreceptor cells and Retinal Pigment Epithelial (RPE) cells and is formed by the
fenestrated choroidal vasculature, Bruch’s membrane and the RPE. The RPE cells, not the choroidal
endothelial cells, provide the high-barrier nature of the outer-BRB. The inner-BRB (iBRB) sustains
neurons of the inner retina and comprises three microvascular beds, the superﬁcial, intermediate, and
deep plexus (shown by red tracts). These are collectively referred to as the neural retinal vasculature.
The endothelial cells of the neural retinal vasculature are responsible for the high-barrier nature of
the iBRB.
Inner-retinal neurons (Bipolar Cells, Horizontal Cells, Amacrine Cells, and Ganglion
Cells) are fully dependent on this inner-retinal vasculature for gas, nutrient, and waste ex-
change. Photoreceptors are less reliant on this vasculature and are supplied by the choroidal
blood supply, which is located on the opposite side of the Retinal Pigment Epithelium
(RPE). This fact is well demonstrated by the mouse Oxygen-Induced Retinopathy model
where inner-retinal neurons are lost during post-natal retinal development in zones that
become avascular before neovascular growth restores the blood supply. OCT and ERG
analysis shows that even with severe inner retinal neuron loss, the photoreceptors are not
lost in any substantial numbers, and the photoreceptors remain responsive to light [ 4–6].
This is important for this review because FEVR/Norrie disease impacts the neural retinal
vasculature due to effects within retinal endothelial cells.
During normal retinal development, the superﬁcial layer extends ﬁrst from the optic
nerve towards the peripheral retina, resulting from proliferation of advancing retinal
endothelial cells [ 1]. Vertical branch sprouts form from this layer and follow guidance
cues from Muller Glia Cells, which extend from the ILM to the outer side of the ONL. The
deep plexus then extends horizontally ahead of the intermediate plexus, which forms last.
Active proliferation of Retinal Endothelial Cells (RECs) is essential for the formation of this
vasculature and, after maturation, RECs are essential components of the neurovascular unit
that supports the formation of the inner blood-retinal-barrier (iBRB) and its high-barrier
nature. The iBRB is a highly selective barrier like the Blood-Brain-Barrier (BBB), and indeed,
the neural retina is part of the Central Nervous System (CNS).
Concurrent with maturation of the developing retina, the hyaloid vasculature re-
gresses, which is a temporary blood supply that runs from the optic nerve head to the
posterior lens capsule to feed a capillary network called the Tunica Vasculosa Lentis. This
embryonic vasculature is required to sustain the developing lens, an avascular tissue, untilCells 2023, 12, 2579 3 of 20
the onset of aqueous humor production to support the lens. Human patients, especially
males, without functional Norrin (X-linked) may also display delayed or failed regression
of this normally embryonic blood supply in addition to failed retinal vascular development.
This is a condition known as Persistent Fetal Vascular Syndrome (PFVS).
The high-barrier nature of the neural retinal endothelium is a result of speciﬁc adap-
tions to decrease the permeability of the endothelium both between and through the cells.
A relatively high-barrier to paracellular transport, between cells, is provided by high
concentrations of adherens-junctions and tight-junctions between neighboring cells [ 7].
Reduced concentration of plasmalemma vesicles, which are caveolae vesicles associated
with Caveolin, is responsible for a lower rate of transcytosis, transport through retinal
endothelial cells [ 8]. Unlike choroidal endothelial cells, retinal endothelial cells are not
fenestrated. The iBRB can become compromised in certain pathological eye diseases such
as diabetic retinopathy, which manifests clinically as increased microvascular permeability
and subsequent retinal hemorrhages [ 9]. Increased concentration of Vascular Endothelial
Growth Factor-A is a major driver of barrier loss from disruption of the adherens-junctions
and tight-junctions. VEGFA was also shown to increase the concentration of caveolae in
bovine RECs [10].
FEVR (Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy) and Norrie disease are inherited disor-
ders that impair development of the neural retina’s vasculature. In Norrie disease and
FEVR (Familial Exudative Vitreo-Retinopathy), there is partial to complete failure of retinal
vasculature formation, resulting in regions of peripheral retinal tissue that remain avascular
and hypoxic [ 11–13]. FEVR was ﬁrst described in 1969 by Criswick and Schepens, and
can result in signiﬁcant blindness from neovascularization, retinal traction, retinal folding,
retinal detachments, and vitreous hemorrhage [ 14]. FEVR may also be milder with the
presence of most of the retinal vasculature, but with the loss of its normally high-barrier
character and even leakiness. Persistent Fetal Vasculature Syndrome (PFVS) may also result,
especially from variants impacting the gene for Norrin, where regression of the temporary
hyaloid vasculature is incomplete to varying degrees [11].
These conditions, especially FEVR, can present with a broad range of severity and
progression, even between siblings with the same FEVR-linked variant. Reviewing the
variable phenotypic penetrance would require much clinical retinal imagery that is beyond
the scope of this review. However, we can refer the reader to Ranchod et al. (2011) for a
succinct review of the clinical presentation of FEVR and a description of the clinical staging
system for FEVR [ 15]. Brieﬂy, the severity of FEVR begins with the presence of avascular
peripheral retina (stage 1). Stage 2 includes the presence of retinal neovascularization
without exudate (stage 2A) or with exudate (stage 2B). Stage 3 involves extramacular
detachment without exudate (stage 3A) or with exudate (stage 3B). Stage 4 includes macular
retinal detachment without exudate (stage 4A) or with exudate (stage 4B). The most severe
stage 5 marks total retinal detachment.
Norrie disease, Coats disease, retinopathy of prematurity (ROP), and familial exuda-
tive vitreoretinopathy (FEVR) belong to a family of rare retinopathies that are characterized
by irregular vascularization or even lack of vascularization of the retina [ 16]. Our group
has contributed to continuing efforts to identify variants in several genes that play a role
in the pathogenesis of these diseases, which include NDP, FZD4, TSPAN12, and LRP5,
members of the canonical Norrin Wnt-signaling pathway [ 17]. Recent studies have also
uncovered additional genes, some that have no direct participation in the Norrin-signaling
pathway. They include CTNNB1, which encodes the canonical Wnt-signaling transcription
factor ß-catenin [ 18];KIF11, which codes for kinesin-motor protein-11, KIF11, active during
mitosis [ 19]; and ZNF408, which encodes a zinc-ﬁnger rich transcription factor (ZNF408)
that has heightened expression in the developing eye [ 20]. More recently, two other Catenin
genes (CTNND1, CTNNA1) and subunit-1 of the Endoplasmic Reticulum Membrane Com-
plex (EMC1), previously linked to cancers and multi-syndromic disease, appear to also
have variants that can result in FEVR-like phenotypes in human patients [21–23].Cells 2023, 12, 2579 4 of 20
Despite their distinctively unique cellular roles, these genes all share the following
characteristic: variants in their coding sequence can negatively impact their essential func-
tions in the retinal endothelial cell, resulting in aberrations of retinal vascular development
and/or maintenance of the inner-BRB. Furthermore, the degree to which they are limited to
their speciﬁc impact on the neural retinal endothelium, versus multi-syndromic pathologies,
tends to reﬂect the relative speciﬁcity of their expression in the retinal endothelium and
other tissues. This review will provide a brief overview of each of these genes, including
the general structure and function of the respective proteins, to better understand how their
variants may impact the retinal endothelium.
2. Genes and Proteins
For ten genes, we have included a ﬁgure that maps the location of many known
pathogenic and likely-pathogenic variants relative to known functional protein domains.
The protein domain variant ﬁgures were constructed using MacVector Pro 18.6.1 (MacVector
Inc., Apex, CA, USA) and Photoshop 2024 (Adobe Inc., San Jose, CA, USA) software. Please
note that variants of uncertain consequence were not included in our ﬁgures, but the reader
can also explore those in the UniProt database (https://www.uniprot.org (accessed on
27 October 2023)) or other databases with variant information [ 24]. Locations of pathogenic
and likely pathogenic amino acid variants are displayed in our ﬁgures using the format of
Bateman et al. (2023) [ 24]. The reader should also keep in mind that variant information is
not static and regular reference to online databases is recommended in addition to searches
of the recent literature. It is now possible for novel likely pathogenic variants to enter
variant databases directly from genetic testing results that do not appear in the literature.
Below, we review the seven earlier FEVR-linked genes, followed by three more recently
linked genes in the following order: KIF11, ZNF408, CTNNB1, NDP, FZD4, LRP5, TSPAN12,
EMC1, CTNNA1, andCTNND1.
2.1. KIF11
KIF11 is located on Chr-10 and encodes for Kinesin Family member-11 (also known as
Eg5), a homo-tetrameric motor protein that is involved in the formation of spindle polarity
during mitosis [ 25]. KIF-11 consists of three major functional components: an N-terminal
motor domain, two coiled-coil domains, and a cargo protein interaction domain at the
C-terminal end. A structural map of KIF-11 and the locations of most known pathogenic
and likely-pathogenic protein-altering variants are shown in Figure 2.
Structurally, Kinesin Motor family proteins form dimers or tetramers with the coiled-
coiled domains of each monomer entwined with the equivalent domains of their multimeric
partners. This elongated structure also serves as a long connecting towbar between the
motor-domain region and the cargo binding domain. As such, most of the protein’s amino
acid sequence is important for movement of KIF-11 along microtubules, correct multimeric
formations, and for the tethering of any required cargo. As a ubiquitously expressed protein,
variants in KIF-11 are associated with multiple developmental syndromes. Heterozygous
variants in this gene have been linked to microcephaly with or without chorioretinopathy,
lymphoedema, or mental retardation (MCLMR), a rare autosomal dominant disease [ 26,27].
However, a study by Li et al. (2016) discovered an association with KIF-11 variants and the
development of familial exudative vitreoretinopathy [ 19]. Variants included L171V , Q525*,
S936*, and R1025G [ 19]. The data suggested that there was a trend between mutations in
KIF-11 and more severe phenotypic outcomes of FEVR—all probands in one study with
KIF-11 variants were diagnosed with either stage 4 or 5 FEVR.Cells 2023, 12, 2579 5 of 20
Cells 2023,  12, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 20 
 
  
Figure 2. Structure and functional domain map of variants in the KIF -11 protein.  Key features of the 
KIF-11 amino acid sequence include an ATP -binding motor -domain region, coiled-coil domains for 
multimer formation, and a C -terminal domain for cargo -protein interactions. Over 30 pathogenic 
and likely  pathogenic variants are indicated by red circles with the variant amino acid indicated by 
the standard single -letter amino acid code. Multisyndromic with potential ocular  eﬀects (red circles ) 
and non-ocular  (black circles ) disease variants are shown. The bottom row * indicates the location 
of nonsense ( stop codon ) variants. These and many other non -pathogenic variants can be explored 
using the UniProt database: https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/P52732 (accessed on  27 October 
2023). 
Structurally, Kinesin Motor family proteins form dimers or  tetramers with the coiled -
coiled domains of each monomer entwined with the equivalent domains of their multi-
meric partners. This elongated structure also serves as a long connecting towbar between 
the motor -domain region and the cargo binding domain. As such, most of the protein’ s 
amino acid sequence is important for movement of KIF -11 along microtubules, correct 
multimeric formations, and for the tethering of any required cargo. As a ubiquitously ex-
pressed protein, variants in KIF -11 are associated with m ultiple developmental syn-
dromes. Heterozygous  variants in this gene have been linked to microcephaly with or 
without chorioretinopathy, lymphoedema, or mental retardation (MCLMR) , a rare auto-
somal dominant disease [26,27]. However, a study by Li et al. (2016 ) discovered an asso-
ciation with KIF -11 variants and the development of familial exudative vitreoretinopathy 
[19]. Variants included L171V, Q525*, S936*, and R1025G [19]. The data suggested that 
there was a trend between mutations in KIF -11 and more severe phenotypic outcomes of 
FEVR —all probands in one study with KIF -11 variants were diagnosed with either stage 
4 or 5 FEVR.  
Generally, disease- causing KIF -11 variants result in multiple syndromic conditions 
in addition to impacting development of the retin al vasculature. This is congruent with 
the fact that KIF -11 appears to be involved in the process of spindle formation and organ-
ization during cell division, a fundamental cellular process not limited to the retinal en-
dothelial cell. It is presumed that the major impact of these disease -causing variants is 
mostly impacting the normal proliferation and migration of RECs in the developing neu-
ral retinal vasculature. Early  post -natal, endothelial cell -speciﬁc knockout of KIF -11 in the 
mouse was reported to impair the formation of the retinal and cerebellar vasculature [28]. 
The capacity of EC cells for ß -catenin- mediated intracellular signal transduction was not 
impacted. Wang and co- authors have hypothesized that the cerebral and retinal microvas-
culature may be more sensitive because these vascular beds are the most rapidly growing 
later in embryonic development.  
Figure 2. Structure and functional domain map of variants in the KIF-11 protein. Key features of the
KIF-11 amino acid sequence include an ATP-binding motor-domain region, coiled-coil domains for
multimer formation, and a C-terminal domain for cargo-protein interactions. Over 30 pathogenic
and likely pathogenic variants are indicated by red circles with the variant amino acid indicated
by the standard single-letter amino acid code. Multisyndromic with potential ocular effects (red
circles) and non-ocular (black circles) disease variants are shown. The bottom row * indicates the
location of nonsense (stop codon) variants. These and many other non-pathogenic variants can be
explored using the UniProt database: https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/P52732 (accessed on
27 October 2023).
Generally, disease-causing KIF-11 variants result in multiple syndromic conditions in
addition to impacting development of the retinal vasculature. This is congruent with the
fact that KIF-11 appears to be involved in the process of spindle formation and organization
during cell division, a fundamental cellular process not limited to the retinal endothelial
cell. It is presumed that the major impact of these disease-causing variants is mostly
impacting the normal proliferation and migration of RECs in the developing neural retinal
vasculature. Early post-natal, endothelial cell-speciﬁc knockout of KIF-11 in the mouse was
reported to impair the formation of the retinal and cerebellar vasculature [ 28]. The capacity
of EC cells for ß-catenin-mediated intracellular signal transduction was not impacted.
Wang and co-authors have hypothesized that the cerebral and retinal microvasculature
may be more sensitive because these vascular beds are the most rapidly growing later in
embryonic development.
2.2. ZNF408
ZNF408 is located on Chr-11 and encodes a protein consisting of one PR-SET domain
and 10 zinc (Zn)-ﬁnger domains. See Figure 3. This protein belongs to the PRDM family
(PRDI-BF1 and RIZ homology domain-containing) of transcription factors, which are
characterized by the presence of a PR domain followed by a variable number of Zn-ﬁnger
repeats [29].Cells 2023, 12, 2579 6 of 20
Cells 2023,  12, x FOR PEER REVIEW  6 of 20 
 
 2.2. ZNF408  
ZNF408 is located on Chr -11 and encodes a protein consisting of one PR -SET domain 
and 10 zinc ( Zn)-ﬁnger domains. See Figure 3. This p rotein belongs to the PRDM family 
(PRDI -BF1 and RIZ homology domain- containing ) of transcription factors, which are 
characterized by the presence of a PR domain followed by a variable number of Zn -ﬁnger 
repeats [29].  
 
Figure 3. Structure and functional d omain map of variants in the ZNF -408 protein.  Key features 
include a PR -SET domain and 10 zinc -ﬁnger domains.  Several pathogenic and likely  pathogenic 
variants are indicated with the variant of amino acid indicated by the standard single -letter amino 
acid code. FEVR (red circles ) and Retinitis Pigmentosa -72 variants (black circles ) are shown. The 
bottom row * indicates the location of nonsense (stop codon ) variants. These variants and many non-
pathogenic variants can be explored in the UniProt database: https://www.uniprot.org/uni-
protkb/Q9H9D4 (accessed on  27 October 2023).  
The PR -SET domain is involved in the recruitment of chromatin remodeling factors 
such as those modulating DNA- methylation. Mu ltiple Zn -ﬁnger motifs occurring in close 
sequence are known to provide speciﬁc structures for binding interactions with other pro-
teins or for binding to speciﬁc DNA -sequences. Members of this protein family can act as 
transcription factors, regulating a diverse range of function- related gene expression and 
some aspects of DNA repair [30]. Changes to the coding sequence of Zn -ﬁnger proteins 
have been associated with aberrations in tissue development, cancer, retinitis pigmentosa, 
and recent genetic stud ies have identiﬁed several variants associated with FEVR [20,31]. 
For example, the H455Y variant was identiﬁed in a family with autosomal -dominant 
FEVR [32].  
Studies in zebraﬁsh have conﬁrmed that some of these variants resulted in irregular 
retinal vasculature development, while studies using human umbilical vascular endothe-
lial cells ( HUVECs ) revealed that variants in ZNF408 reduced endothelial cell capacity for 
angiogenesis [20,32]. While further research is required to identify the speciﬁc gene ex-
pression changes associated with variants of ZNF408, one hypothesis suggests that vari-
ants in ZNF408 result in the decreased transcription of genes responsible for the formation 
of new capillaries in response to hypoxia  [32]. 
2.3. CTNNB1  
Located on Chr -3, CTNNB1  encodes the protein ß -catenin. Before ß -catenin variants 
were reported for FEVR, many variants of this gene were already associated with cancers. 
The roles of ß -catenin can be relatively complex because of its regulatory roles in cell -to-
Figure 3. Structure and functional domain map of variants in the ZNF-408 protein. Key features
include a PR-SET domain and 10 zinc-ﬁnger domains. Several pathogenic and likely pathogenic
variants are indicated with the variant of amino acid indicated by the standard single-letter amino
acid code. FEVR (red circles) and Retinitis Pigmentosa-72 variants (black circles) are shown. The
bottom row * indicates the location of nonsense (stop codon) variants. These variants and many non-
pathogenic variants can be explored in the UniProt database: https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/
Q9H9D4 (accessed on 27 October 2023).
The PR-SET domain is involved in the recruitment of chromatin remodeling factors
such as those modulating DNA-methylation. Multiple Zn-ﬁnger motifs occurring in close
sequence are known to provide speciﬁc structures for binding interactions with other
proteins or for binding to speciﬁc DNA-sequences. Members of this protein family can act
as transcription factors, regulating a diverse range of function-related gene expression and
some aspects of DNA repair [ 30]. Changes to the coding sequence of Zn-ﬁnger proteins
have been associated with aberrations in tissue development, cancer, retinitis pigmentosa,
and recent genetic studies have identiﬁed several variants associated with FEVR [ 20,31]. For
example, the H455Y variant was identiﬁed in a family with autosomal-dominant FEVR [ 32].
Studies in zebraﬁsh have conﬁrmed that some of these variants resulted in irregular
retinal vasculature development, while studies using human umbilical vascular endothelial
cells (HUVECs) revealed that variants in ZNF408 reduced endothelial cell capacity for
angiogenesis [ 20,32]. While further research is required to identify the speciﬁc gene expres-
sion changes associated with variants of ZNF408, one hypothesis suggests that variants in
ZNF408 result in the decreased transcription of genes responsible for the formation of new
capillaries in response to hypoxia [32].
2.3. CTNNB1
Located on Chr-3, CTNNB1 encodes the protein ß-catenin. Before ß-catenin variants
were reported for FEVR, many variants of this gene were already associated with cancers.
The roles of ß-catenin can be relatively complex because of its regulatory roles in cell-
to-cell adhesion and its pivotal role in canonical Wnt-signaling. Many cancer-related
variants are clustered in the N-terminal domain of ß-catenin where they prevent the normal
regulatory targeting of the protein to degradation at the proteosome. See Figure 4. This
effectively results in abnormally constant hyperactivity of ß-catenin, which promotes
cancer-cell proliferation [ 33]. In addition to its central role in Wnt-signaling, most ß-catenin
is associated with E-Cadherin of the adherens-junctions in endothelial cells [34].Cells 2023, 12, 2579 7 of 20
Cells 2023,  12, x FOR PEER REVIEW  7 of 20 
 
 cell adhesio n and its pivotal role in canonical Wnt -signaling. Many cancer -related variants 
are clustered in the N -terminal domain of ß -catenin where they prevent the normal regu-
latory targeting of the protein to degradation at the proteosome. See Figure 4. This eﬀec-
tively results in abnormally constant hyperactivity of ß -catenin, which promotes cancer -
cell proliferation. [33]. In addition to its central role in Wnt -signaling, most ß-c atenin is 
associated with E -Cadherin of the adherens -junctions in endothelial cells [34]. 
 
Figure 4. Structure and functional domain map of variants in the ß -catenin protein.  Key structural 
features include 12 imperfect ARM repeats. The protein has numerous regulatory protein interac-
tion partners that bind ß -catenin in separate domains but also in some overlapping regions. The N -
terminus is essential for binding with alpha -Catenin as well as the beta -TrCP ubiquitin ligase that 
targets ß -catenin for proteosome degradation. Pathogenic and likely  pathogenic variants linked to 
FEVR (red circles ) and non-FEVR (cancer, black circles) conditions are indicated by marking the 
linked var iant amino acid. The variant marked on row d indicates the position of a large in -frame 
deletion. The bottom row * indicates the location of nonsense (stop codon ) variants. These and other 
non-pathogenic variants can be explored in the UniProt database: htt ps://www.uniprot.org/uni-
protkb/P35222 (accessed on  27 October 2023). 
Most of the protein’ s amino acid sequence comprises 12 ARM motifs, with each ARM 
region forming an alpha -helical structure. These multiple helixes are stacked together lat-
erally, like logs, with this entire stack also twisted into a higher -order helical structure. 
Most of the length of this large super -structure forms a groove that provides for interac-
tions with proteins such as TCF/LEF transcription factors  [33]. For an excellent and d e-
tailed review of ß -catenin ’s structures , we refer the reader to Huber and Weis (2001 ) [34]. 
While most variants in CTNNB1 are cancer -promoting and located near the N -terminus, 
studies have reported FEVR - and PFVS -linked variants. Two such examples are a f rame -
shift -causing ﬁve base -pair insertion and the A295G variant in probands with FEVR and 
PFVS, respectively [18,3 5]. 
2.4. NDP  
NDP (Norrie Disease Protein, Norrin) is a cysteine -rich protein that serves as the lig-
and for the Norrin Wnt -signaling pathway. Norrin has been found to function as an angi-
ogenic factor and as a neuroprotective growth factor [3 6]. Norrin mediates angiogenesis 
partly through the induction of insulin -like growth factor -1 [37]. The NDP  gene is located 
on Chr- X and subsequently, sympt omatic probands are more often male. While associated 
with Norrie d isease, missense variants in NDP are also associated with diagnosed FEVR, 
both X -linked and sporadic [ 38]. Pathologic variants in NDP have been associated with 
Figure 4. Structure and functional domain map of variants in the ß-catenin protein. Key structural
features include 12 imperfect ARM repeats. The protein has numerous regulatory protein interaction
partners that bind ß-catenin in separate domains but also in some overlapping regions. The N-
terminus is essential for binding with alpha-Catenin as well as the beta-TrCP ubiquitin ligase that
targets ß-catenin for proteosome degradation. Pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants linked to
FEVR (red circles) and non-FEVR (cancer, black circles) conditions are indicated by marking the
linked variant amino acid. The variant marked on row d indicates the position of a large in-frame
deletion. The bottom row * indicates the location of nonsense (stop codon) variants. These and
other non-pathogenic variants can be explored in the UniProt database: https://www.uniprot.org/
uniprotkb/P35222 (accessed on 27 October 2023).
Most of the protein’s amino acid sequence comprises 12 ARM motifs, with each ARM
region forming an alpha-helical structure. These multiple helixes are stacked together
laterally, like logs, with this entire stack also twisted into a higher-order helical structure.
Most of the length of this large super-structure forms a groove that provides for interactions
with proteins such as TCF/LEF transcription factors [ 33]. For an excellent and detailed
review of ß-catenin’s structures, we refer the reader to Huber and Weis (2001) [ 34]. While
most variants in CTNNB1 are cancer-promoting and located near the N-terminus, studies
have reported FEVR- and PFVS-linked variants. Two such examples are a frame-shift-
causing ﬁve base-pair insertion and the A295G variant in probands with FEVR and PFVS,
respectively [18,35].
2.4. NDP
NDP (Norrie Disease Protein, Norrin) is a cysteine-rich protein that serves as the ligand
for the Norrin Wnt-signaling pathway. Norrin has been found to function as an angiogenic
factor and as a neuroprotective growth factor [ 36]. Norrin mediates angiogenesis partly
through the induction of insulin-like growth factor-1 [ 37]. The NDP gene is located on
Chr-X and subsequently, symptomatic probands are more often male. While associated
with Norrie disease, missense variants in NDP are also associated with diagnosed FEVR,
both X-linked and sporadic [ 38]. Pathologic variants in NDP have been associated with
several vascular retinopathies, including Norrie disease, FEVR, persistent fetal vasculature
syndrome (PFVS), retinopathy of prematurity (ROP), and Coats disease [ 16]. While these
retinopathies are largely limited to the retinal vasculature, Norrie disease exhibits the most
severe manifestations with retinal dysgenesis and is unique in its association with several
additional symptoms, including intellectual disability, seizures, alterations to peripheral
vascular structure, and gradual hearing loss [16].Cells 2023, 12, 2579 8 of 20
The Norrin protein is secreted by retinal Müller glial cells and the Norrin homodimer
binds to FZD-4, which triggers canonical Wnt-signaling that governs angiogenesis in the
retina and the inner ear [ 39,40]. TSPAN-12 and LRP-5 are essential co-receptors that enhance
this binding. See Figure 5. Studies have identiﬁed the speciﬁc interacting regions between
Norrin and FZD-4 or LRP-5 and conﬁrmed that variants altering these structures result in
decreased signaling activity via this essential pathway [39].
Cells 2023,  12, x FOR PEER REVIEW  8 of 20 
 
 several vascular retinopathies, including Norrie disease, FEVR, persistent fetal vascula-
ture syndrome ( PFVS ), retinopathy of prematurity (ROP ), and Coats disease [16]. While 
these retinopathies are largely limited to the retinal vasculature, Norrie disease exhibits 
the most severe manifestations with retinal dysgenesis and is unique in its association 
with several additional symptoms, including intellectual disability, seizures, alterations 
to peripheral vascular structure, and gradual hearing loss [16].  
The Norrin protein is secreted by retinal Müller glial cells and the Norrin homodimer 
binds to FZD -4, which triggers canonical Wnt -signaling that governs angiogenesis in the 
retina and the inner ear [ 39,40]. TSPAN -12 and LRP -5 are essential co- receptors that en-
hance this binding. See  Figure 5. Studies have identiﬁed the speciﬁc interacting regions 
between Norrin and FZD -4 or LRP -5 and conﬁrmed that variants altering these structures 
result in decreased signaling activity via this essential pathway [ 39]. 
 
Figure 5. The Norrin Wnt -signaling pathway in retinal endothelial cells. The main functional pro-
teins in the Norrin Wnt -signaling pathway, which is active in neural retinal endothelial cells. Nor-
rin’s binding aﬃnity for FZD -4 is increased when the co -receptors Tspan -12 and LRP -5 are present. 
Direct protein -protein interactions are indicated between various partners in the complex by dashed 
double -arrows. Speciﬁc extracellular domains and surfaces of proteins within this ligand/receptor 
complex provide the various interactions and  the synergy which makes retinal endothelial cells 
uniquely sensitive to Norrin. Norrin binding blocks activity of the Destruction Complex, which re-
duces the delivery of ß -catenin to proteosome-degradation. The resulting increase in cytoplasmic ß -
catenin a nd its translocation into the nucleus leads to interaction with LEF/TCF transcription factors 
to regulate the expression of target genes. General structural domains and features are illustrated 
for Norrin, FZD -4, LRP-5, Tspan -12, including transmembrane do mains, extracellular loops , and 
other extracellular domains that are involved in protein interactions.  
Structurally, NDP consists of two main domains: an N -terminal signal peptide which 
is involved in facilitating the protein ’s extracellular export and a h ighly conserved cyste-
ine-knot motif, which makes up the bulk of the protein. See Figure 6. 
Figure 5. The Norrin Wnt-signaling pathway in retinal endothelial cells. The main functional proteins
in the Norrin Wnt-signaling pathway, which is active in neural retinal endothelial cells. Norrin’s
binding afﬁnity for FZD-4 is increased when the co-receptors Tspan-12 and LRP-5 are present. Direct
protein-protein interactions are indicated between various partners in the complex by dashed double-
arrows. Speciﬁc extracellular domains and surfaces of proteins within this ligand/receptor complex
provide the various interactions and the synergy which makes retinal endothelial cells uniquely
sensitive to Norrin. Norrin binding blocks activity of the Destruction Complex, which reduces the
delivery of ß-catenin to proteosome-degradation. The resulting increase in cytoplasmic ß-catenin
and its translocation into the nucleus leads to interaction with LEF/TCF transcription factors to
regulate the expression of target genes. General structural domains and features are illustrated for
Norrin, FZD-4, LRP-5, Tspan-12, including transmembrane domains, extracellular loops, and other
extracellular domains that are involved in protein interactions.
Structurally, NDP consists of two main domains: an N-terminal signal peptide which
is involved in facilitating the protein’s extracellular export and a highly conserved cysteine-
knot motif, which makes up the bulk of the protein. See Figure 6.
Protein variants that alter the cysteine-knot conﬁrmation are associated with more
detrimental outcomes involving dysplasia or dysgenesis of the retina (i.e., Norrie disease),
while variants that are located outside the motif are more commonly seen in patients
with FEVR, in which the retina is present, albeit incompletely vascularized [ 11]. FEVR-
associated genetic changes include R121Q, which has been identiﬁed by multiple studies
across ethnically diverse populations, and S57X and K104Q, which have been present in
cases of both FEVR and Norrie disease [ 41]. This highlights the interconnectedness of the
mechanisms that underlie these two conditions.Cells 2023, 12, 2579 9 of 20
Cells 2023,  12, x FOR PEER REVIEW  9 of 20 
 
  
Figure 6. Structure and functional domain map of variants in NDP ( Norrin). Key features include 
an N -terminal signal peptide required to target Norrin for extracellular transport. Four longer and 
four shorter beta -strand regions are layered in the Norrin monomer and the entire tertiary structure 
is stabilized by multiple disulﬁde bridges. The so -called cysteine knot domain involves most of the 
mature Norrin amino acid sequence. Over 50 pathogenic and likely  pathogenic variants are indi-
cated by red circles, marking the variant amino acid linked to Norrie d isease or FEVR. The bott om 
row * indicates the location of nonsense (stop codon ) variants. These and other non-pathogenic var-
iants can be explored in the UniProt database: https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/Q00604 (ac-
cessed on  27 October 2023).  
Protein variants that alter the cysteine -knot conﬁrmation are associated with more 
detrimental outcomes involving dysplasia or dysgenesis of the retina ( i.e., Norrie disease ), 
while variants that are located outside the motif are more commonly seen in patients with 
FEVR, in which the retina is present, albeit incompletely vascularized [ 11]. FEVR -associ-
ated genetic changes include R121Q, which has been identiﬁed by multiple stu dies across 
ethnically diverse populations, and S57X and K104Q, which have been present in cases of 
both FEVR and Norrie disease [4 1]. This highlights the interconnectedness of the mecha-
nisms that underlie these two conditions.  
This signaling pathway is sp eciﬁc to the retinal endothelial cell by virtue of the 
unique combination available of all four members of the ligand/receptor complex in the 
retinal endothelial cell: Norrin, FZD4, LRP5 , and TSPAN12. Genetic loss of function ex-
periments in mice indicate that while there is some overlap of Norrin and Wnt7a/Wnt7b 
signaling systems in the retina and brain, Norrin is more important for the iBRB and 
Wnt7a/7b has the larger role in development of the Blood -Brain -Barrier [ 42]. Subse-
quently, changes to the struct ure of any of these four proteins have been linked to similar 
retinal vascular pathology, such as FEVR or ROP [ 43]. Interestingly, while FEVR ’s presen-
tation can diﬀer greatly across individuals, studies in mice have indicated that loss of 
function in Norr in, FZD -4, or LRP5 can often result in similar clinical phenotypes [ 43]. 
Ohlmann et al. (2005) were the ﬁrst to demonstrate that ectopic expression of Norrin 
restored normal retinal angiogenesis that is lost in Ndp  knockout mice [ 44]. Mice with ec -
topic e xpression of Norrin in the lens were created using the lens -speciﬁc chicken Beta -
B1-Crystallin gene's proximal promoter to drive recombinant Norrin expression in the 
lens. These mice were crossed with Ndpy/- mice to demonstrate that Norrin could act at 
signiﬁcant distance to rescue Norrin  Wnt-signaling and development of the neural retinal 
vasculature and promote regression of the tunica vasculosa lentis. Our research group has 
demonstrated that a single intra -vitreal injection of Norrin protein can accel erate vascular 
regrowth and reduce inner- retina neuronal cell loss in the mouse oxygen- induced reti -
Figure 6. Structure and functional domain map of variants in NDP (Norrin). Key features include an
N-terminal signal peptide required to target Norrin for extracellular transport. Four longer and four
shorter beta-strand regions are layered in the Norrin monomer and the entire tertiary structure is
stabilized by multiple disulﬁde bridges. The so-called cysteine knot domain involves most of the
mature Norrin amino acid sequence. Over 50 pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants are indicated
by red circles, marking the variant amino acid linked to Norrie disease or FEVR. The bottom row *
indicates the location of nonsense (stop codon) variants. These and other non-pathogenic variants
can be explored in the UniProt database: https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/Q00604 (accessed on
27 October 2023).
This signaling pathway is speciﬁc to the retinal endothelial cell by virtue of the unique
combination available of all four members of the ligand/receptor complex in the retinal
endothelial cell: Norrin, FZD4, LRP5, and TSPAN12. Genetic loss of function experiments
in mice indicate that while there is some overlap of Norrin and Wnt7a/Wnt7b signaling
systems in the retina and brain, Norrin is more important for the iBRB and Wnt7a/7b
has the larger role in development of the Blood-Brain-Barrier [ 42]. Subsequently, changes
to the structure of any of these four proteins have been linked to similar retinal vascular
pathology, such as FEVR or ROP [ 43]. Interestingly, while FEVR’s presentation can differ
greatly across individuals, studies in mice have indicated that loss of function in Norrin,
FZD-4, or LRP5 can often result in similar clinical phenotypes [43].
Ohlmann et al. (2005) were the ﬁrst to demonstrate that ectopic expression of Norrin
restored normal retinal angiogenesis that is lost in Ndp knockout mice [ 44]. Mice with
ec-topic expression of Norrin in the lens were created using the lens-speciﬁc chicken Beta-
B1-Crystallin gene’s proximal promoter to drive recombinant Norrin expression in the
lens. These mice were crossed with Ndpy/ mice to demonstrate that Norrin could act at
signiﬁcant distance to rescue Norrin Wnt-signaling and development of the neural retinal
vasculature and promote regression of the tunica vasculosa lentis. Our research group has
demonstrated that a single intra-vitreal injection of Norrin protein can accelerate vascular
regrowth and reduce inner-retina neuronal cell loss in the mouse oxygen-induced reti-
nopathy model [ 6,45]. More recently, Pauzuolyte et al. (2023) have shown that intravenous
treatment of Ndp knockout mice with an adeno-associated viral vector 9 (AAV9) could
rescue the failed development of the microvasculature in the neural retina and cochlea [ 46].
Because of Norrin’s central role in the development of the iBRB and its involvement
in the pathogenesis of various retinopathies, recent research has been centered on Nor-
rin’s capacity to combat the effects of VEGF-induced capillary leakage. Using a diabeticCells 2023, 12, 2579 10 of 20
retinopathy mouse model, these studies indicate that exogenous Norrin can help to restore
the retinal endothelial cell junctions via the canonical Norrin Wnt-signaling pathway [47].
2.5. FZD4
As has been highlighted in this paper, the Wnt-signaling pathway is responsible for
the maintenance of the blood-retinal-barrier in the eye as well as for governing the process
of retinal angiogenesis in the developing retina. The FZD4 gene on Chr-11 encodes Frizzled
Class-4 Receptor, a member of the Frizzled gene family, which are 7-transmembrane domain
proteins. FZD-4 is the central cognate receptor for binding Norrin and is required for retinal
angiogenesis and formation of the iBRB [ 48,49]. Norrin’s binds to FZD-4 and co-receptors
LRP5 and TSPAN12, and subsequently, changes to the structure of any of these four proteins
can cause FEVR [ 43]. Interestingly, while FEVR’s presentation can differ greatly across
individuals, studies in mice have indicated that loss of function in Norrin, FZD-4, or LRP5
can often result in similar clinical phenotypes [43].
FZD4 has seven helix domains, a PDZ-binding domain, and a cysteine-rich Wnt-
binding domain located near the N-terminus that is presented extracellularly and serves
as the NDP binding site. See Figure 7. NDP is not known to bind to any other members
of the Frizzled family of receptors, which highlights the speciﬁcity of the NDP/FZD-4
ligand/receptor relationship [43].
Cells 2023,  12, x FOR PEER REVIEW  10 of 20 
 
 nopathy model [6, 45]. More recently , Pauzuolyte et al. (2023) have shown that intravenous 
treatment of Ndp knockout mice with an adeno -associated viral vect or 9 (AAV9) could 
rescue the failed development of the microvasculature in the neural retina and cochlea 
[46]. 
Because of Norrin ’s central role in the development of the iBRB and its involvement 
in the pathogenesis of various retinopathies, recent research  has been centered on Norrin ’s 
capacity to combat the eﬀects of VEGF- induced capillary leakage. Using a diabetic reti-
nopathy mouse model, these studies indicate that exogenous Norrin can help to restore 
the retinal endothelial cell junctions via the canonical Norrin Wnt -signaling pathway [ 47].  
2.5. FZD4  
As has been highlighted in this paper, the Wnt- signaling pathway is responsible for 
the maintenance of the blood -retinal- barrier in the eye as well as for governing the process 
of retinal angiogenesis in the developing retina. The FZD4  gene on Chr -11 encodes Friz-
zled Class -4 Receptor, a member of the Frizzled gene family , which are 7 -transmembrane 
domain proteins. FZD -4 is the central cognate receptor for binding Norrin and is required 
for retinal angiogenesis and formation of the iBRB [4 8,49]. Norrin ’s binds to FZD- 4 and 
co-receptors LRP5 and TSPAN12, and subsequently, changes to the structure of any of 
these four proteins can cause FEVR [4 3]. Interestingly, while FEVR ’s presentation can dif-
fer greatly across individuals, studies in mice have indicated that loss of function in Nor-
rin, FZD -4, or LRP5 can often result in similar clinical phenotypes [ 43]. 
FZD4  has seven  helix d omains, a PDZ -binding domain, and a cysteine -rich Wnt -
binding domain located near the N -terminus that is presented extracellularly and serves 
as the NDP binding site. See Figure 7. NDP is not known to bind to any other members of 
the Frizzled family of rec eptors, which highlights the speciﬁcity of the NDP/FZD -4 lig-
and/receptor relationship [ 43]. 
 
Figure 7. Structure and functional domain map of variants in FZD-4 (Frizzled-4). Key features in-
clude an N -terminal Wnt -binding domain, seven transmembrane helical regions, and a PDZ -bind-
ing domain. The locations of 25 pathogenic and likely  pathogenic variants are indicated (red circles ), 
showing the pathogenic amino acid variant. The  bottom row * indicates the location of nonsense 
(stop codon ) variants. These and other non- pathogenic variants can be explored in the UniProt da-
tabase: https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/Q9ULV1 (accessed on  27 October 2023).  
Some examples of single missense variations of FZD4  that are linked to FEVR include 
M105V, R417Q , and G488D [50 ]. A sequencing survey of subjects with FEVR, Norrie d is-
ease, PFVS , Coats disease , and ROP found a strong statistical association of a double var-
iant, p.[P33S (;)P168S], with ROP and a moderate statistical association with infant birth 
weight [ 51]. The locations of 25 pathogenic and likely  pathogenic variants are shown in 
Figure 7. We expect that the sequencing of new FEVR subjects will continue to reveal novel 
pathogenic varia nts. One such recent example was reported by our group recently, 
Cys450Ter, a nonsense variant that generates an early termination codon within TM helix-
Figure 7. Structure and functional domain map of variants in FZD-4 (Frizzled-4). Key features
include an N-terminal Wnt-binding domain, seven transmembrane helical regions, and a PDZ-
binding domain. The locations of 25 pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants are indicated (red
circles), showing the pathogenic amino acid variant. The bottom row * indicates the location of
nonsense (stop codon) variants. These and other non-pathogenic variants can be explored in the
UniProt database: https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/Q9ULV1 (accessed on 27 October 2023).
Some examples of single missense variations of FZD4 that are linked to FEVR include
M105V , R417Q, and G488D [ 50]. A sequencing survey of subjects with FEVR, Norrie
disease, PFVS, Coats disease, and ROP found a strong statistical association of a double
variant, p.[P33S(;)P168S], with ROP and a moderate statistical association with infant birth
weight [ 51]. The locations of 25 pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants are shown in
Figure 7. We expect that the sequencing of new FEVR subjects will continue to reveal
novel pathogenic variants. One such recent example was reported by our group recently,
Cys450Ter, a nonsense variant that generates an early termination codon within TM helix-6.
This was predicted to result in the loss of TM helix-7 and the C-terminal PDZ-binding
domain of the FZD4 protein [17].
2.6. LRP5
The LDL-Receptor-Related Protein-5 is encoded by the LRP5 gene on Chr-11 and
is expressed in retinal endothelial cells. We refer the reader to He et al. (2004) for a
more detailed review regarding the LRP-5 and LRP-6 receptors [ 52]. As noted above, in
conjunction with TSPAN-12, LRP-5 acts as a co-receptor that enhances Norrin’s bindingCells 2023, 12, 2579 11 of 20
afﬁnity for FZD4. LRP5 is required for vascular development in the deep plexus of the
neural retina [ 53,54]. The LRP-5 protein has four extracellular Beta-Propeller/EGF-Like
domain regions, one transmembrane domain region, and two intracellular disordered
domains at the C-terminus. See Figure 8.
Cells 2023,  12, x FOR PEER REVIEW  11 of 20 
 
 6. This was predicted to result in the loss of TM helix -7 and the C -terminal PDZ -binding 
domain of the FZD4 protein [ 17]. 
2.6. LRP5  
The LDL -Receptor- Related Protein -5 is encoded by the LRP5 gene on Chr -11 and is 
expressed in retinal endothelial cells. We refer the reader to He et al. (2004) for a more 
detailed review regarding the LRP -5 and LRP -6 receptors [ 52]. As noted above, in con-
junction with TSPAN -12, LRP -5 acts as a co -receptor that enhances Norrin’ s binding aﬃn-
ity for FZD4. LRP5 is required for vascular development in the deep plex us of the neural 
retina [5 3,54]. The LRP- 5 protein has four extracellular Beta -Propeller/ EGF -Like domain 
regions, one transmembrane domain region, and two intracellular disordered domains at 
the C -terminus. See Figure 8. 
 
Figure 8. Structure and functional domain map of variants in LRP -5. Key features include the trans-
membrane domain, two intracellular disordered domains , and four extracellular Beta -Propel-
ler/EGF-Like domain regions. Over 90 pathogenic and likely  pathogenic amino acid variants are  
indicated, aﬀecting the retina (red circles ) and non -ocular syndromes (black circles, bone density ). 
The bottom row * indicates the location of nonsense (stop codon ) variants. These and many non-
pathogenic variants can be explored in the UniProt database: https://www.uniprot.org/uni-
protkb/O75197 (accessed on  27 October 2023 ). 
LRP- 5 has direct interactions with Norrin ( see Figure 5), using positively and nega-
tively charged amino acid sidechains. The Beta -Propeller domains - 1 and -2 nearer the 
extracellular N- terminus interact with the edge of the Norrin dimer, away from where 
FZD4 interacts with the central surface of the Norrin dimer. A ternary complex is formed 
once LRP -5 and FZD -4 are bound to Norrin [ 39]. Generally, the currently known distribu-
tion of pathogenic variants is greater in this region of the protein.  
In addition to FEVR, pathologic mutations in LRP- 5 are also associated with familial 
osteoporosis and high bone density syndromes [5 2]. Studies have identiﬁed several mu-
tations in LRP5 associate d with FEVR. A few examples are L145F, R444C, A522T, T798A, 
and N1121D [ 55]. Qin et al. (2005) noted that these ﬁve missense mutations fall within the 
highly conserved Beta-P ropeller domains of the LRP -5 protein [ 55]. 
2.7. TSPAN -12 
TSPAN -12 is a member of  the Tetraspanin protein family, which are characterized by 
four transmembrane domains with both their C- terminus and N- terminus being in the 
cytoplasm. These 4 -transmembrane domains are linked by one small extracellular loop, 
Figure 8. Structure and functional domain map of variants in LRP-5. Key features include the trans-
membrane domain, two intracellular disordered domains, and four extracellular Beta-Propeller/EGF-
Like domain regions. Over 90 pathogenic and likely pathogenic amino acid variants are indicated,
affecting the retina (red circles) and non-ocular syndromes (black circles, bone density). The bottom
row * indicates the location of nonsense (stop codon) variants. These and many non-pathogenic
variants can be explored in the UniProt database: https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/O75197
(accessed on 27 October 2023).
LRP-5 has direct interactions with Norrin (see Figure 5), using positively and nega-
tively charged amino acid sidechains. The Beta-Propeller domains -1 and -2 nearer the
extracellular N-terminus interact with the edge of the Norrin dimer, away from where FZD4
interacts with the central surface of the Norrin dimer. A ternary complex is formed once
LRP-5 and FZD-4 are bound to Norrin [ 39]. Generally, the currently known distribution of
pathogenic variants is greater in this region of the protein.
In addition to FEVR, pathologic mutations in LRP-5 are also associated with familial
osteoporosis and high bone density syndromes [ 52]. Studies have identiﬁed several mu-
tations in LRP5 associated with FEVR. A few examples are L145F, R444C, A522T, T798A,
and N1121D [ 55]. Qin et al. (2005) noted that these ﬁve missense mutations fall within the
highly conserved Beta-Propeller domains of the LRP-5 protein [55].
2.7. TSPAN-12
TSPAN-12 is a member of the Tetraspanin protein family, which are characterized by
four transmembrane domains with both their C-terminus and N-terminus being in the
cytoplasm. These 4-transmembrane domains are linked by one small extracellular loop, one
small intracellular loop, and one large extracellular loop. Interactions with other proteins
and the variable roles of different TSPAN proteins are strongly impacted by amino acid
sequence differences in the large extracellular loop [56]. See Figure 9.Cells 2023, 12, 2579 12 of 20
Cells 2023,  12, x FOR PEER REVIEW  12 of 20 
 
 one small intracellular loop,  and one large extracellular loop. Interactions with other pro-
teins and the variable roles of diﬀerent TSPAN proteins are strongly impacted by amino 
acid sequence diﬀerences in the large extracellular loop [ 56]. See Figure 9. 
 
Figure 9. Structure and functional domain map of variants in TSPAN -12. Key features include the 
four transmembrane (TM) helical domains, the large extracellular loop region, and the dimer inter-
face region. TSPAN -12 is a member of the Tetraspanin family of membrane proteins. Both the N -
terminal and C -terminal domains are intracellular. The locations of 14 pathogenic and likely  patho-
genic variants are indicated by red circles with the variant amino acid indicated by the standard 
single-letter amino acid code. Row “d” indicates the location of a multiple amino acid deletion. The 
bottom row * indicates the location of nonsense (stop codon ) variants. Exploration of additional non -
pathogenic variants can be found in the UniProt database: https://www.uniprot.org/uni-
protkb/O95859 (accessed  on 27 October 2023 ). 
TSPAN12  variants can cause autosomal -dominant FEVR [57 ]. Variants of human 
TSPAN -12 have also been linked with ROP, speciﬁc types of cancer via regulation of pro-
gression, viral infections using TSPAN -12, and mental retardation [58–60]. Many variants 
identiﬁed in probands diagnosed with FEVR are predicted to result in a truncated protein, 
though studies were unable to perceive a diﬀerence in clinical presentation between pa-
tients with shortened proteins and those with missense mutati ons [ 57]. A237P is a variant 
observed in at least ﬁve families with FEVR [ 61]. 
Elegant work by Junge et al. ( 2009) used transgenic and knockout combinations in 
mice to demonstrate that normal vascularization of the neural retina required a full com-
binatio n of Fzd -4, Lrp -5, and Tspan -12, as well as Norrin [6 2]. Loss of one allele of Tspan -
12 or Lrp5 caused minimal reduction in vertical sprouts in the neural retina. Losing one 
allele each of Tspan -12 and Lrp5 had a much greater eﬀect on this reduction. Complete lack 
of the Tspan12 protein in homozygous knockouts resulted in the failure to form vertical 
sprouts from the superﬁcial plexus of the developing retinal vasculature. Furthermore, in 
cell-based transf ection assays, TSPAN -12’s ability to enhance Norrin/beta -catenin signal-
ing relied on the co- transfection of both FZD4  and LRP5.  
Additional studies with Tspan -12(−/−) mice conﬁrmed a signiﬁcant increase in large ret-
inal vessels and abnormal arterial -venou s crossing along with upregulation of VE -Cad-
herin, which regulates iBRB integrity and EC inactivity [6 0]. These retinas also displayed 
a lack of intraretinal capillaries, and glomeruloid vessel malformations, which were like 
defects observed in pathogenic variants of Ndp, Fzd4 , and Lrp5 . Mural cells were also re-
duced or absent in some areas of the retinas of Tspan -12(−/−) mice. Additional features in-
cluded microaneurysms, impaired hyaloid vessel regression, focal hemorrhages, retinal 
Figure 9. Structure and functional domain map of variants in TSPAN-12. Key features include
the four transmembrane (TM) helical domains, the large extracellular loop region, and the dimer
interface region. TSPAN-12 is a member of the Tetraspanin family of membrane proteins. Both
the N-terminal and C-terminal domains are intracellular. The locations of 14 pathogenic and likely
pathogenic variants are indicated by red circles with the variant amino acid indicated by the standard
single-letter amino acid code. Row “d” indicates the location of a multiple amino acid deletion. The
bottom row * indicates the location of nonsense (stop codon) variants. Exploration of additional
non-pathogenic variants can be found in the UniProt database: https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/
O95859 (accessed on 27 October 2023).
TSPAN12 variants can cause autosomal-dominant FEVR [ 57]. Variants of human
TSPAN-12 have also been linked with ROP , speciﬁc types of cancer via regulation of pro-
gression, viral infections using TSPAN-12, and mental retardation [ 58–60]. Many variants
identiﬁed in probands diagnosed with FEVR are predicted to result in a truncated protein,
though studies were unable to perceive a difference in clinical presentation between pa-
tients with shortened proteins and those with missense mutations [ 57]. A237P is a variant
observed in at least ﬁve families with FEVR [61].
Elegant work by Junge et al. (2009) used transgenic and knockout combinations
in mice to demonstrate that normal vascularization of the neural retina required a full
combination of Fzd-4, Lrp-5, and Tspan-12, as well as Norrin [ 62]. Loss of one allele of
Tspan-12 orLrp5 caused minimal reduction in vertical sprouts in the neural retina. Losing
one allele each of Tspan-12 andLrp5 had a much greater effect on this reduction. Complete
lack of the Tspan12 protein in homozygous knockouts resulted in the failure to form vertical
sprouts from the superﬁcial plexus of the developing retinal vasculature. Furthermore, in
cell-based transfection assays, TSPAN-12’s ability to enhance Norrin/beta-catenin signaling
relied on the co-transfection of both FZD4 and LRP5.
Additional studies with Tspan-12( / )mice conﬁrmed a signiﬁcant increase in large
retinal vessels and abnormal arterial-venous crossing along with upregulation of VE-
Cadherin, which regulates iBRB integrity and EC inactivity [ 60]. These retinas also dis-
played a lack of intraretinal capillaries, and glomeruloid vessel malformations, which were
like defects observed in pathogenic variants of Ndp, Fzd4, and Lrp5. Mural cells were also
reduced or absent in some areas of the retinas of Tspan-12( / )mice. Additional features
included microaneurysms, impaired hyaloid vessel regression, focal hemorrhages, retinal
glial cell activation, and upregulation of plasmalemma vesicle-associated protein (PLVAP).
The later effect was presumably due to impairment of Norrin signaling because NorrinCells 2023, 12, 2579 13 of 20
Wnt-signaling is one factor thought to suppress PLVAP expression in retinal endothelial
cells, which is essential to generate its high-barrier nature.
2.8. Notable Recent Genes Linked to FEVR Phenotypes
While this review has summarized the seven genes most associated with FEVR, above,
current work continues to identify additional genes that may impact the neural retinal vas-
culature. Some recent notable genes include EMC1, which encodes the Endoplasmic Retic-
ulum Membrane Protein Complex Subunit-1 protein, CTNNA1, which encodes -Catenin,
andCTNND1, which encodes the cell adhesion protein p120 (Catenin delta-1) [21–23].
2.9. EMC-1
Disease-causing variants in the EMC-1 gene, on Chr-1, are mostly associated with
impairment of neurological development and other multi-syndromic impacts on devel-
opment. These include hypotonia, global developmental delay, scoliosis, and cerebellar
atrophy [ 63]. This gene encodes the Endoplasmic Reticulum Membrane Complex (ERMC)
Subunit-1 protein. The ERMC comprises ten subunits and this subunit is essential to insert
the membrane domains of newly synthesized transmembrane proteins into the ER mem-
brane. These would include single transmembrane domain proteins like LRP-5, tetraspanin
proteins like TSPAN-12, and seven-transmembrane proteins like FZD-4, all required for
Norrin Wnt-Signaling.
More recently, evidence from Li et al. (2023) suggests that speciﬁc variants of this
gene can sometimes elicit a FEVR phenotype as well [ 23]. In mouse retinal endothelial
cells, deletions in EMC1 have been associated with abnormal retinal angiogenesis and
the reduced proliferation of superﬁcial vessels [ 23]. EMC1 protein was suggested to have
a role in Norrin Wnt-signaling via upregulating the Norrin receptor, FZD4, via a post-
transcriptional pathway. Whole exome sequencing (WES) of patients with FEVR identiﬁed
a single novel missense variant in EMC1, I762V . When transfected into HEK 294T cells,
the variant caused decreased protein levels of FZD4 [ 23]. This variant falls within the
second large beta-sheet region of the subunit. (Figure 10) Moreover, the retinal phenotype
observed in EMC1 KO mice appears to be like that seen in mice with deﬁciencies in the
any of the four main genes involved in the canonical Norrin Wnt-signaling (NDP, FZD4,
LRP5, TSPAN12) [ 23]. Subsequently, the data from this study provide evidence for a novel
candidate gene related to FEVR that deserves additional attention in future research.
2.10. CTNNA1
The-Catenin protein is a Catenin family member quite different in structure from
beta- and delta-Catenin. It plays a key role in mediation of Cadherin clustering coupled
to actin cytoskeleton dynamics [ 64]. This is partly dependent on regions of the protein
that interact with beta-Catenin and with alpha-Actinin. In effect, this protein provides
at least one regulatory connection between Wnt-Signaling pathways and the assembly
of E-Cadheren for adherens junction formation. Along with delta-Catenin, -Catenin is
another factor that associates with beta-Catenin and affects the available cytoplasmic pool
of beta-Catenin for regulation of Wnt-signaling and regulation of adherens junctions.
Previous research has linked -Catenin, encoded by the CTNNA1 gene on Chr-5, with
a wide range of pathology, including gastric and breast cancers [ 65,66]. Moreover, butterﬂy-
shaped pigment dystrophy has also been linked previously with variants in CTNNA1,
suggesting that the gene may be involved in the development of retinal structure [ 67]. The
tertiary structure of this protein is formed by the interactions of no less than 27 alpha-helical
regions. The ﬁrst six helical domains form a homodimerization region, while interaction
with CTNNB1 requires helical regions 3 and 4. A region including helix 11 and 12 is
responsible for interactions with alpha-actinin. See Figure 11.Cells 2023, 12, 2579 14 of 20
Cells 2023,  12, x FOR PEER REVIEW  13 of 20 
 
 glial cell activation, and upregulation of plasmalemma vesicle -associated protein 
(PLVAP ). The later eﬀect was presumably due to impairment of Norrin signaling  because 
Norrin Wnt -signaling is one factor thought to suppress PLVAP expression in retinal en-
dothelial cells, which is essential to generate its high- barrier nature.  
2.8. Notable Recent Genes Linked to FEVR Phenotypes  
While this review has summarized the seven genes most associated with FEVR, 
above, current work continues to identify additional genes that may impact the neural 
retinal vasculature. Some recent notable genes include EMC1, which encodes the Endo-
plasmic Reticulum Membrane Protein Complex Subunit -1 protein, CTNNA1 , which en-
codes α-Catenin, and CTNND1, which encodes the cell adhesion prote in p120 (Catenin 
delta-1) [21–23]. 
2.9. EMC-1 
Disease -causing variants in the EMC-1  gene, on Chr -1, are mostly associated with 
impairment of neurological development and other multi -syndromic impacts on develop-
ment. These include hypotonia, global developm ental delay, scoliosis, and cerebellar at-
rophy [6 3]. This gene encodes the Endoplasmic Reticulum Membrane Complex ( ERMC ) 
Subunit -1 protein. The ERMC comprise s ten subunits and this subunit is essential to insert 
the membrane domains of newly synthesized transmembrane proteins into the ER mem-
brane. These would include single transmembrane domain proteins like LRP -5, tetra-
spanin proteins like TSPAN -12, and seven -transmembrane proteins like FZD- 4, all re-
quired for Norri n Wnt -Signaling . 
More recently , evidence from Li et al. (2023) suggests that speciﬁc variants of this 
gene can sometimes elicit a FEVR phenotype as well [23]. In mouse retinal endothelial 
cells, deletions in EMC1 have been associated with abnormal retinal  angiogenesis and the 
reduced proliferation of superﬁcial vessels [23]. EMC1 protein was suggested to have a 
role in Norrin Wnt -signaling via upregulating the Norrin receptor, FZD4, via a post -tran-
scriptional pathway. Whole exome sequencing (WES ) of patients with FEVR identiﬁed a 
single novel missense variant in EMC1 , I762V . When transfected into HEK 294T cells, the 
variant caused decreased protein levels of FZD4 [23]. This variant falls within the second 
large beta -sheet region of the subunit. (Figure 10 ) Moreover, the retinal phenotype ob-
served in EMC1 KO mice appears to be like that seen in mice with deﬁciencies in the any 
of the four main genes involved in the canonical Norrin Wnt -signaling (NDP, FZD4, LRP5, 
TSPAN12 ) [23]. Subsequently, the data from this study provide evidence for a novel can-
didate gene related to FEVR that deserves additional attention in future research.  
 
Figure 10. Structure and functional domain map of variants in Endoplasmic Reticulum Membrane
Complex Protein Subunit-1. Key features include a C-terminal endoplasmic reticulum transmembrane
helix and two large complex beta-sheet barrels joined by smaller helical domains. Pathogenic and
likely pathogenic variants are indicated for those linked to FEVR (red circle), Retinitis Pigmentosa
(red circle with black outline), and those linked to other developmental conditions (black circles).
The bottom row * indicates the location of nonsense (stop codon) variants. Exploration of additional
non-pathogenic variants can be found in the UniProt database: https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/
Q8N766 (accessed on 27 October 2023).
Cells 2023,  12, x FOR PEER REVIEW  14 of 20 
 
 Figure 10. Structure and functional domain map of variants in Endoplasmic Reticulum Membrane 
Complex Protein Subunit-1. Key feat ures include a C -terminal endoplasmic reticulum transmem-
brane helix and two large complex beta -sheet barrels joined by smaller helical domains. Pathogenic 
and likely  pathogenic variants are indicated for those linked to FEVR (red circle ), Retinitis  Pigmen-
tosa (red circle with black outline ), and those linked to other developmental conditions ( black cir-
cles). The bottom row * indicates the location of nonsense (stop codon ) variants. Exploration of ad-
ditional non -pathogenic variants can be found in the UniPro t database: https://www.uni-
prot.org/uniprotkb/Q8N766 ( accessed on  27 October 2023).  
2.10. CTNNA1  
The α-Catenin protein is a Catenin family member quite diﬀerent in structure from 
beta- and delta -Catenin. It plays a key role in mediation of Cadherin clustering coupled 
to actin cytoskeleton dynamics [6 4]. This is partly dependent on regions of the protein that 
interact with beta -Catenin and wi th alpha -Actinin. In eﬀect, this protein provides at least 
one regulatory connection between Wnt -Signaling pathways and the assembly  of E-
Cadheren for adherens junction formation. Along with delta -Catenin, α-Catenin is an-
other factor that associates with be ta-Catenin and aﬀects the available cytoplasmic pool of 
beta-Catenin for regulation of Wnt -signaling and regulation of adherens junctions.  
Previous research has linked α -Catenin, encoded by the CTNNA1 gene on Chr -5, 
with a wide range of pathology, including gastric and breast cancers [ 65,66]. Moreover, 
butterﬂy -shaped pigment dystrophy has also been linked previously with variants in 
CTNNA1 , suggesting that the gene may be involved in the development of retinal struc-
ture [ 67]. The tertiary structure of th is protein is formed by the interactions of no less than 
27 alpha -helical regions. The ﬁrst six helical domains form a homodimerization region, 
while interaction with CTNNB1 requires helical regions 3 and 4. A region including helix 
11 and 12 is responsib le for interactions with alpha -actinin. See Figure 11. 
 
Figure 11. Structure and functional domain map of variants in CTNNA1 ( Catenin alpha -1). Second-
ary structures are derived from Alphafold data (https://alphafold.ebi.ac.uk/entry/P35221  (accessed 
on 27 October 2023).) [68,69]. Pathogenic and likely  pathogenic variants are indicated for those 
linked to FEVR (red circles) , patterned macular dystrophy (red circles with black outlines ), and those 
linked to non -retinal conditions including cancers (black circles ). The bottom row * indicates the 
location of nonsense (stop codon ) variants. Exploration of additional non -pathogenic variants can 
be found in the UniProt database: https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/P35221 (accessed on  27 Oc-
tober 2023). 
A recent st udy by Zhu et al. ( 2021) observed that the conditional knockout of 
CTNNA1 in mouse endothelial cells resulted in retinas that exhibited delayed peripheral 
Figure 11. Structure and functional domain map of variants in CTNNA1 (Catenin alpha-1). Secondary
structures are derived from Alphafold data (https://alphafold.ebi.ac.uk/entry/P35221 (accessed on
27 October 2023).) [ 68,69]. Pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants are indicated for those linked to
FEVR (red circles), patterned macular dystrophy (red circles with black outlines), and those linked to
non-retinal conditions including cancers (black circles). The bottom row * indicates the location of
nonsense (stop codon) variants. Exploration of additional non-pathogenic variants can be found in
the UniProt database: https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/P35221 (accessed on 27 October 2023).
A recent study by Zhu et al. (2021) observed that the conditional knockout of CTNNA1
in mouse endothelial cells resulted in retinas that exhibited delayed peripheral vasculariza-
tion and blood vessel leakage, thus partially mimicking the clinical phenotype observed
in patients with FEVR [ 22]. Whole exome sequencing of patients with FEVR identiﬁed
three novel variants in CTNNA1 that appear to be associated with the disease [ 22]. Com-
pound heterozygous mice were created by crossing CTNNA1 conditional knock out miceCells 2023, 12, 2579 15 of 20
with mice carrying one of the discovered variants, F72S, resulting in a phenotype that was
like that observed in mice with homozygous conditional knockout of CTNNA1 in retinal
endothelial cells [ 22]. Speciﬁcally inhibited vascular development progress compared to
wild-type mice. These mouse models displayed substantial amounts of avascular periph-
eral retina by age P7, compared to wild-type retinas where the superﬁcial vasculature has
normally reached the peripheral edge of the neural retina. The inhibition was substantial
for heterozygous CtnnaF72S/+mice but less severe than conditional heterozygous knockout
Ctnna1iECKO/+mice. A family with a heterozygous R376Cfs*27 variant had the most severe
FEVR phenotype, congruent with the fact that this variant results in loss of functional
-Catenin. Wnt-reporter cell-transfection activation assays in HEK293 cells showed that the
-Catenin variants increased beta-Catenin-dependent reporter activation in contrast to wild
type-Catenin that reduced Wnt-reporter activity. Those results support the hypothesis
that-Catenin variants can impact retinal vascular development through a mechanism
that alters normal beta-Catenin-mediated signaling [22].
2.11. CTNND1
Variants in this gene are previously known for causing craniofacial, cardiac syndromes,
and other developmental conditions [ 70]. The CTNND1 gene (Chr-11) encodes for the
Catenin delta-1 protein (p120-Catenin). This protein is another member of the catenin
protein family and contains armadillo repeat domains that facilitate its interaction with
other proteins including E-Cadherin (Figure 12). Association or displacement from E-
Cadherin regulates the stability of E-Cadherin in adherens junctions [ 71]. The p120 protein
has other interactions and roles that regulate epithelial and endothelial barriers. These
include its selective inhibition of RhoA, which appears to be mutually exclusive of p120-
Catenin interaction with E-Cadherin, and which facilitates the exchange of RhoA at cell-
to-cell contacts [ 72]. Studies in Xenopus laevis have revealed another interaction of p120-
Catenin with the Kaiso repressor. This interaction serves to decrease the Kaiso-mediated
repression of several canonical Wnt target genes including c-Myc, Cyclin-D1, c-Fos, and
Siamois [73]. This apparently works in parallel to support the beta-Catenin and TCF/LEF
de-repression of Wnt target genes.
Cells 2023,  12, x FOR PEER REVIEW  15 of 20 
 
 vascularization and blood vessel leakage, thus partially mimicking the clinical phenotype 
observed in  patients with FEVR [22]. Whole exome sequencing of patients with FEVR 
identiﬁed three novel variants in CTNNA1 that appear to be associated with the disease 
[22]. Compound heterozygous mice were created by crossing CTNNA1 conditional knock 
out mice with mice carrying one of the discovered variants, F72S, resulting in a phenotype 
that was like that observed in mice with homozygous conditional knockout of CTNNA1 
in retinal endothelial cells [22]. Speciﬁcally inhibited vascular development progress com-
pared to wild -type mice. These mouse models displayed substantial amounts of avascular 
peripheral retina by age P7, compared to wild -type retinas where the superﬁcial vascula-
ture has normally reached the peripheral edge of the neural retina. The inhibition was  
substantial for heterozygous CtnnaF72S/+ mice but less severe than conditional heterozy-
gous knockout Ctnna1iECKO/+  mice. A family with a heterozygous R376Cfs*27 variant had 
the most severe FEVR phenotype, congruent with the fact that this variant results in loss 
of functional α -Catenin. Wnt -reporter cell -transfection activation assays in HEK293 cells 
showed that the α-Catenin variants increased beta -Catenin -dependent reporter activation 
in contrast to wild type α -Catenin that reduced Wnt -reporter activity.  Those results sup-
port the hypothesis that α-Catenin variants can impact retinal vascular development 
through a mechanism that alters normal beta -Catenin -mediated signaling [22].  
2.11. CTNND1  
Variants in this gene are previously known for causing craniofacial, cardiac syn-
dromes, and other developmental conditions  [70]. The CTNND1  gene (Chr-11) encodes 
for the Catenin delta -1 protein ( p120 -Catenin ). This protein is another member of the 
catenin protein family and contains armadillo repeat domains that facilitate its interaction 
with other proteins including E -Cadherin (Figure 12) . Association or displacement from 
E-Cadherin regulates the stability of E -Cadherin in adherens junctions [7 1]. The p120 pro-
tein has other interactions and roles that regulat e epithelial and endothelial barriers. These 
include its selective inhibition of RhoA, which appears to be mutually exclusive of p120 -
Catenin interaction with E -Cadherin, and which facilitates the exchange of RhoA at cell -
to-cell contacts [7 2]. Studies in Xenopus laevis have revealed another interaction of p120 -
Catenin with the Kaiso repressor. This interaction serves to decrease the Kaiso-mediated 
repression of several canonical Wnt target genes including c- Myc, Cyclin -D1, c-Fos, and 
Siamois  [73]. This apparently works in parallel to support the beta -Catenin and TCF/LEF 
de-repression of Wnt target genes .  
 
Figure 12. Structure and functional domain map of variants in CTNND1 (Catenin delta-1). Pathogenic
and likely pathogenic variants are indicated for those linked to FEVR (red circles) and those linked to
other developmental conditions (black circles). The bottom row * indicates the location of nonsense
(stop codon) variants. Exploration of additional non-pathogenic variants can be found in the UniProt
database: https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/O60716 (accessed on 27 October 2023).Cells 2023, 12, 2579 16 of 20
A sample of 140 families associated with FEVR were evaluated with WES analysis,
resulting in the identiﬁcation of three candidate variants in CTNND1 [21]. Transfection of
these variants (R317C, K623*, R700Q) into HEK293T cells was associated with a subsequent
decrease in Wnt-signaling activity, suggesting that these may possibly be pathogenic
variants associated with FEVR [ 21]. Moreover, the knockout of CTNND1 in mouse retinal
endothelial cells resulted in a compromised blood-retinal-barrier and delayed regression of
the hyaloid vessels—both of which are seen in FEVR [21].
3. Conclusions
We can draw several conclusions from this brief review regarding the mechanisms
underlying FEVR and related phenotypes that impact the development and integrity of the
neural retinal vasculature.
1. As we survey the protein domain maps that we have presented of currently known
pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants, we can conclude that almost any functional
subdomain of these proteins can be involved. This is not surprising because important
protein-interaction functions or structural functions exist throughout their entire
amino acid sequences. There are few, if any, non-essential regions in the ten proteins
reviewed. This would suggest that there may be many novel variants awaiting
discovery in the human population, especially for more recently linked genes such
as CTNNA1;
2. FEVR can involve the disruption of any one of several different functions in endothe-
lial cells, not just those related directly to the Norrin Wnt-signaling pathway. This
is established by disease-causing variants in ZNF408, KIF11, and EMC1. However,
what all these genes and their protein products have in common is that they are
particularly important for critical retinal endothelial cell functions. These include
correct membrane insertion of transmembrane proteins in the ER, regulation of ad-
herens and tight junctions, cell growth, cell proliferation, migration of endothelial
cells during formation of the retinal vasculature, and maturation of a high-barrier
character endothelium. It is possible, and expected, that we may continue to discover
novel FEVR-linked genes and good candidates would be any gene that is particularly
enriched in retinal endothelial cells versus other endothelial cells. However, more
broadly expressed genes with roles in any of the above noted functions may be good
candidates as well. That may include nine other genes for subunits of the Endoplasmic
Reticulum Membrane Complex;
3. The multiple allele knockout studies by Junge et al. (2009) in mice suggested the
possibility that more severe FEVR-like phenotypes could result from combinations
of two or more different alleles that have a minimal impact alone [ 66]. Our group
recently surveyed a cohort of FEVR patients and immediate relatives to conﬁrm that
the incidence of protein-altering variants in two or three different FEVR-linked genes
was substantially greater than in the general population [ 17]. Thus, it is possible
that combined mild-alleles might result in more severe phenotypes, but we have not
yet described clear examples of this in FEVR. To explore such possibilities for this
relatively rare condition, it will be helpful to apply genetic testing methods that survey
as many genes as possible and to form global research collaborations to investigate
genotypes and phenotypes from varied populations.
Rare inherited retinal vascular diseases such as FEVR, Norrie disease, and Persistent
Fetal Vascular Syndrome have historically been difﬁcult to study due to their scarcity in
the population, their complex presentations, and subsequently, their challenging diagnosis.
Moreover, these conditions are sometimes multigenic and it is possible that the severity
of phenotypes may be impacted by combinations of two or more protein-altering variants
that may have no phenotype, or a mild phenotype, on their own. Clear evidence of
such multigenic contributions is yet to be described and deserves the attention of future
investigations. While this highlights the challenges of genetic testing for patients with
rare retinal pathology, it is imperative that efforts continue to elucidate the mechanismsCells 2023, 12, 2579 17 of 20
that govern these conditions. We would predict that not all FEVR-linked genes have been
uncovered at this point in time and many other novel variants of known FEVR-linked
genes will continue to be found.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, K.P .M. and V .L.; writing—original draft preparation, V .L,
K.P .M., G.A., C.P ., V .J. and R.R.; review and editing, V .L, K.P .M., W.A.D. and K.A.D.; visualization,
K.P .M. and G.A.; supervision, K.P .M.: funding acquisition, K.P .M. All authors have read and agreed
to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: Authors who worked on this review were supported in part by the Pediatric Retinal
Research Foundation, Michigan, USA and the Carls Foundation, Michigan, USA.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Fruttiger, M. Development of the Mouse Retinal Vasculature: Angiogenesis versus Vasculogenesis. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci.
2002, 43, 522–527.
2. Zuercher, J.; Fritzsche, M.; Feil, S.; Mohn, L.; Berger, W. Norrin Stimulates Cell Proliferation in the Superﬁcial Retinal Vascular
Plexus and Is Pivotal for the Recruitment of Mural Cells. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2012, 21, 2619–2630. [CrossRef]
3. Selvam, S.; Kumar, T.; Fruttiger, M. Retinal Vasculature Development in Health and Disease. Prog. Retin. Eye Res. 2018 ,63, 1–19.
[CrossRef]
4. Tokunaga, C.C.; Mitton, K.P .; Dailey, W.; Massoll, C.; Roumayah, K.; Guzman, E.; Tarabishy, N.; Cheng, M.; Drenser, K.A. Effects
of Anti-VEGF Treatment on the Recovery of the Developing Retina Following Oxygen-Induced Retinopathy. Investig. Ophthalmol.
Vis. Sci. 2014, 55, 1884–1892. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Dailey, W.A.; Drenser, K.A.; Wong, S.C.; Cheng, M.; Vercellone, J.; Roumayah, K.K.; Feeney, E.V .; Deshpande, M.; Guzman, A.E.;
Trese, M.; et al. Ocular Coherence Tomography Image Data of the Retinal Laminar Structure in a Mouse Model of Oxygen-Induced
Retinopathy. Data Brief 2017, 15, 491–495. [CrossRef]
6. Dailey, W.A.; Drenser, K.A.; Wong, S.C.; Cheng, M.; Vercellone, J.; Roumayah, K.K.; Feeney, E.V .; Deshpande, M.; Guzman, A.E.;
Trese, M.; et al. Norrin Treatment Improves Ganglion Cell Survival in an Oxygen-Induced Retinopathy Model of Retinal Ischemia.
Exp. Eye Res. 2017, 164, 129–138. [CrossRef]
7. Fresta, C.G.; Fidilio, A.; Caruso, G.; Caraci, F.; Giblin, F.J.; Leggio, G.M.; Salomone, S.; Drago, F.; Bucolo, C. A New Human
Blood–Retinal Barrier Model Based on Endothelial Cells, Pericytes, and Astrocytes. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 1636. [CrossRef]
8. Glenney, J.R.; Soppet, D. Sequence and Expression of Caveolin, a Protein Component of Caveolae Plasma Membrane Domains
Phosphorylated on Tyrosine in Rous Sarcoma Virus-Transformed Fibroblasts. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1992 ,89, 10517–10521.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
9. Gardner, T.W.; Antonetti, D.A.; Barber, A.J.; Lanoue, K.F.; Levison, S.W.; Penn State Retina Research Group. Diabetic Retinopathy:
More Than Meets the Eye. Surv. Ophthalmol. 2002, 47, S253–S262. [CrossRef]
10. Feng, Y.; Venema, V .J.; Venema, R.C.; Tsai, N.; Caldwell, R.B. VEGF Induces Nuclear Translocation of Flk-1/KDR, Endothelial
Nitric Oxide Synthase, and Caveolin-1 in Vascular Endothelial Cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 1999 ,256, 192–197.
[CrossRef]
11. Wu, W.-C.; Drenser, K.; Trese, M.; Capone, A., Jr.; Dailey, W. Retinal Phenotype-Genotype Correlation of Pediatric Patients
Expressing Mutations in the Norrie Disease Gene. Arch. Ophthalmol. 2007, 125, 225–230. [CrossRef]
12. Drenser, K.A.; Trese, M.T. Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy and Osteoporosis-Pseudoglioma Syndrome Caused by a Mutation
in the LRP5 Gene. Arch. Ophthalmol. 2007, 125, 431–432. [CrossRef]
13. Drenser, K.A.; Dailey, W.; Capone, A.; Trese, M.T. Genetic Evaluation to Establish the Diagnosis of X-Linked Familial Exudative
Vitreoretinopathy. Ophthalmic Genet. 2006, 27, 75–78. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Criswick, V .G.; Schepens, C.L. Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 1969 ,68, 578–594. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Ranchod, T.M.; Ho, L.Y.; Drenser, K.A.; Capone, A.; Trese, M.T. Clinical Presentation of Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy.
Ophthalmology 2011, 118, 2070–2075. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Scruggs, B.A.; Reding, M.Q.; Schimmenti, L.A. NDP-Related Retinopathies. In GeneReviews ®[Internet]; University of Washington:
Seattle, WA, USA, 2023.
17. Cicerone, A.P .; Dailey, W.; Sun, M.; Santos, A.; Jeong, D.; Jones, L.; Koustas, K.; Drekh, M.; Schmitz, K.; Haque, N.; et al. A
Survey of Multigenic Protein-Altering Variant Frequency in Familial Exudative Vitreo-Retinopathy (FEVR) Patients by Targeted
Sequencing of Seven FEVR-Linked Genes. Genes 2022, 13, 495. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18. Dixon, M.W.; Stem, M.S.; Schuette, J.L.; Keegan, C.E.; Besirli, C.G. CTNNB1 Mutation Associated with Familial Exudative
Vitreoretinopathy (FEVR) Phenotype. Ophthalmic Genet. 2016, 37, 468–470. [CrossRef]
19. Li, J.K.; Fei, P .; Li, Y.; Huang, Q.J.; Zhang, Q.; Zhang, X.; Rao, Y.Q.; Li, J.; Zhao, P . Identiﬁcation of Novel KIF11 Mutations in
Patients with Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy and a Phenotypic Analysis. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 26564. [CrossRef]Cells 2023, 12, 2579 18 of 20
20. Collin, R.W.J.; Nikopoulos, K.; Dona, M.; Gilissen, C.; Hoischen, A.; Boonstra, F.N.; Poulter, J.A.; Kondo, H.; Berger, W.; Toomes,
C.; et al. ZNF408 Is Mutated in Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy and Is Crucial for the Development of Zebraﬁsh Retinal
Vasculature. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2013, 110, 9856–9861. [CrossRef]
21. Yang, M.; Li, S.; Huang, L.; Zhao, R.; Dai, E.; Jiang, X.; He, Y.; Lu, J.; Peng, L.; Liu, W.; et al. CTNND1 Variants Cause Familial
Exudative Vitreoretinopathy through the Wnt/Cadherin Axis. JCI Insight 2022, 7, e158428. [CrossRef]
22. Zhu, X.; Yang, M.; Zhao, P .; Li, S.; Zhang, L.; Huang, L.; Huang, Y.; Fei, P .; Yang, Y.; Zhang, S.; et al. Catenin 1 Mutations
Cause Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy by Overactivating Norrin/ -Catenin Signaling. J. Clin. Investig. 2021 ,131, e139869.
[CrossRef]
23. Li, S.; Yang, M.; Zhao, R.; Peng, L.; Liu, W.; Jiang, X.; He, Y.; Dai, E.; Zhang, L.; Yang, Y.; et al. Defective EMC1 Drives Abnormal
Retinal Angiogenesis via Wnt/ -Catenin Signaling and May Be Associated with the Pathogenesis of Familial Exudative
Vitreoretinopathy. Genes Dis. 2023, 10, 2572–2585. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Bateman, A.; Martin, M.J.; Orchard, S.; Magrane, M.; Ahmad, S.; Alpi, E.; Bowler-Barnett, E.H.; Britto, R.; Bye-A-Jee, H.; Cukura,
A.; et al. UniProt: The Universal Protein Knowledgebase in 2023. Nucleic Acids Res 2023, 51, D523–D531. [CrossRef]
25. Kashina, A.S.; Baskin, R.J.; Cole, D.G.; Wedaman, K.P .; Saxton, W.M.; Scholey, J.M. A Bipolar Kinesin. Nature 1996 ,379, 270–272.
[CrossRef]
26. Jones, G.E.; Ostergaard, P .; Moore, A.T.; Connell, F.C.; Williams, D.; Quarrell, O.; Brady, A.F.; Spier, I.; Hazan, F.; Moldovan, O.;
et al. Microcephaly with or without Chorioretinopathy, Lymphoedema, or Mental Retardation (MCLMR): Review of Phenotype
Associated with KIF11 Mutations. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 2014, 22, 881–887. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Mirzaa, G.M.; Enyedi, L.; Parsons, G.; Collins, S.; Medne, L.; Adams, C.; Ward, T.; Davitt, B.; Bicknese, A.; Zackai, E.; et al.
Congenital Microcephaly and Chorioretinopathy Due to de Novo Heterozygous KIF11 Mutations: Five Novel Mutations and
Review of the Literature. Am. J. Med. Genet. A 2014, 164, 2879–2886. [CrossRef]
28. Wang, Y.; Smallwood, P .M.; Williams, J.; Nathans, J. A Mouse Model for Kinesin Family Member 11 (Kif11)-Associated Familial
Exudative Vitreoretinopathy. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2020, 29, 1121–1131. [CrossRef]
29. Di Zazzo, E.; De Rosa, C.; Abbondanza, C.; Moncharmont, B. PRDM Proteins: Molecular Mechanisms in Signal Transduction and
Transcriptional Regulation. Biology 2013, 2, 107–141. [CrossRef]
30. Cassandri, M.; Smirnov, A.; Novelli, F.; Pitolli, C.; Agostini, M.; Malewicz, M.; Melino, G.; Raschellà, G. Zinc-Finger Proteins in
Health and Disease. Cell Death Discov. 2017, 3, 17071. [CrossRef]
31. Avila-Fernandez, A.; Perez-Carro, R.; Corton, M.; Lopez-Molina, M.I.; Campello, L.; Garanto, A.; Fernandez-Sanchez, L.; Duijkers,
L.; Lopez-Martinez, M.A.; Riveiro-Alvarez, R.; et al. Whole-Exome Sequencing Reveals ZNF408 as a New Gene Associated with
Autosomal Recessive Retinitis Pigmentosa with Vitreal Alterations. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2015 ,24, 4037–4048. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Karjosukarso, D.W.; van Gestel, S.H.C.; Qu, J.; Kouwenhoven, E.N.; Duijkers, L.; Garanto, A.; Zhou, H.; Collin, R.W.J. An
FEVR-Associated Mutation in ZNF408 Alters the Expression of Genes Involved in the Development of Vasculature. Hum. Mol.
Genet. 2018, 27, 3519–3527. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Xu, W.; Kimelman, D. Mechanistic Insights from Structural Studies of Beta-Catenin and Its Binding Partners. J. Cell Sci. 2007 ,120,
3337–3344. [CrossRef]
34. Huber, A.H.; Weis, W.I. The Structure of the Beta-Catenin/E-Cadherin Complex and the Molecular Basis of Diverse Ligand
Recognition by Beta-Catenin. Cell2001, 105, 391–402. [CrossRef]
35. Taylor, R.L.; Soriano, C.S.; Williams, S.; Dzulova, D.; Ashworth, J.; Hall, G.; Gale, T.; Lloyd, I.C.; Inglehearn, C.F.; Toomes, C.;
et al. Bi-Allelic Mutation of CTNNB1 Causes a Severe Form of Syndromic Microphthalmia, Persistent Foetal Vasculature and
Vitreoretinal Dysplasia. Orphanet J. Rare Dis. 2022, 17, 110. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Ohlmann, A.; Tamm, E.R. Norrin: Molecular and Functional Properties of an Angiogenic and Neuroprotective Growth Factor.
Prog. Retin. Eye Res. 2012, 31, 243–257. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Zeilbeck, L.F.; Müller, B.B.; Leopold, S.A.; Senturk, B.; Langmann, T.; Tamm, E.R.; Ohlmann, A. Norrin Mediates Angiogenic
Properties via the Induction of Insulin-like Growth Factor-1. Exp. Eye Res. 2016, 145, 317–326. [CrossRef]
38. Shastry, B.S.; Hejtmancik, J.F.; Trese, M.T. Identiﬁcation of Novel Missense Mutations in the Norrie Disease Gene Associated with
One X-Linked and Four Sporadic Cases of Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy. Hum. Mutat. 1997, 9, 396–401. [CrossRef]
39. Ke, J.; Harikumar, K.G.; Erice, C.; Chen, C.; Gu, X.; Wang, L.; Parker, N.; Cheng, Z.; Xu, W.; Williams, B.O.; et al. Structure and
Function of Norrin in Assembly and Activation of a Frizzled 4-Lrp5/6 Complex. Genes Dev. 2013, 27, 2305–2319. [CrossRef]
40. Xu, Q.; Wang, Y.; Dabdoub, A.; Smallwood, P .M.; Williams, J.; Woods, C.; Kelley, M.W.; Jiang, L.; Tasman, W.; Zhang, K.; et al.
Vascular Development in the Retina and Inner Ear: Control by Norrin and Frizzled-4, a High-Afﬁnity Ligand-Receptor Pair. Cell
2004, 116, 883–895. [CrossRef]
41. Xiao, H.; Tong, Y.; Zhu, Y.; Peng, M. Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy-Related Disease-Causing Genes and Norrin/ -Catenin
Signal Pathway: Structure, Function, and Mutation Spectrums. J. Ophthalmol. 2019, 2019, 5782536. [CrossRef]
42. Wang, Y.; Cho, C.; Williams, J.; Smallwood, P .M.; Zhang, C.; Junge, H.J.; Nathans, J. Interplay of the Norrin and Wnt7a/Wnt7b
Signaling Systems in Blood-Brain Barrier and Blood-Retina Barrier Development and Maintenance. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
2018, 115, E11827–E11836. [CrossRef]
43. Ye, X.; Wang, Y.; Nathans, J. The Norrin/Frizzled4 Signaling Pathway in Retinal Vascular Development and Disease. Trends Mol.
Med. 2010, 16, 417–425. [CrossRef]Cells 2023, 12, 2579 19 of 20
44. Ohlmann, A.; Scholz, M.; Goldwich, A.; Chauhan, B.K.; Hudl, K.; Ohlmann, A.V .; Zrenner, E.; Berger, W.; Cvekl, A.; Seeliger,
M.W.; et al. Ectopic Norrin Induces Growth of Ocular Capillaries and Restores Normal Retinal Angiogenesis in Norrie Disease
Mutant Mice. J. Neurosci. 2005, 25, 1701–1710. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45. Tokunaga, C.C.; Chen, Y.-H.; Dailey, W.; Cheng, M.; Drenser, K.A. Retinal Vascular Rescue of Oxygen-Induced Retinopathy in
Mice by Norrin. Investig. Opthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2013, 54, 222. [CrossRef]
46. Pauzuolyte, V .; Patel, A.; Wawrzynski, J.R.; Ingham, N.J.; Leong, Y.C.; Karda, R.; Bitner-Glindzicz, M.; Berger, W.; Waddington,
S.N.; Steel, K.P .; et al. Systemic Gene Therapy Rescues Retinal Dysfunction and Hearing Loss in a Model of Norrie Disease.
EMBO Mol Med 2023, 15, e17393. [CrossRef]
47. Díaz-Coránguez, M.; Lin, C.-M.; Liebner, S.; Antonetti, D.A. Norrin Restores Blood-Retinal Barrier Properties after Vascular
Endothelial Growth Factor-Induced Permeability. J. Biol. Chem. 2020, 295, 4647–4660. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48. Bang, I.; Kim, H.R.; Beaven, A.H.; Kim, J.; Ko, S.B.; Lee, G.R.; Lee, H.; Im, W.; Seok, C.; Chung, K.Y.; et al. Biophysical and
Functional Characterization of Norrin Signaling through Frizzled4. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2018, 115, 8787–8792. [CrossRef]
49. Paes, K.T.; Wang, E.; Henze, K.; Vogel, P .; Read, R.; Suwanichkul, A.; Kirkpatrick, L.L.; Potter, D.; Newhouse, M.M.; Rice, D.S.
Frizzled 4 Is Required for Retinal Angiogenesis and Maintenance of the Blood-Retina Barrier. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2011 ,
52, 6452–6461. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50. Kondo, H.; Hayashi, H.; Oshima, K.; Tahira, T.; Hayashi, K. Frizzled 4 Gene (FZD4) Mutations in Patients with Familial Exudative
Vitreoretinopathy with Variable Expressivity. Br. J. Ophthalmol. 2003, 87, 1291–1295. [CrossRef]
51. Dailey, W.A.; Gryc, W.; Garg, P .G.; Drenser, K.A. Frizzled-4 Variations Associated with Retinopathy and Intrauterine Growth
Retardation. Ophthalmology 2015, 122, 1917–1923. [CrossRef]
52. He, X.; Semenov, M.; Tamai, K.; Zeng, X. LDL Receptor-Related Proteins 5 and 6 in Wnt/Beta-Catenin Signaling: Arrows Point
the Way. Development 2004, 131, 1663–1677. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53. Xia, C.; Yablonka-Reuveni, Z.; Gong, X. LRP5 Is Required for Vascular Development in Deeper Layers of the Retina. PLoS ONE
2010, 5, e11676. [CrossRef]
54. Huang, W.; Li, Q.; Amiry-Moghaddam, M.; Hokama, M.; Sardi, S.H.; Nagao, M.; Warman, M.L.; Olsen, B.R. Critical Endothelial
Regulation by LRP5 during Retinal Vascular Development. PLoS ONE 2016, 11, e0152833. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55. Qin, M.; Hayashi, H.; Oshima, K.; Tahira, T.; Hayashi, K.; Kondo, H. Complexity of the Genotype-Phenotype Correlation
in Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy with Mutations Im the LRP5 and/or FZD4 Genes. Hum. Mutat. 2005 ,26, 104–112.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
56. Seigneuret, M.; Delaguillaumie, A.; Lagaudrière-Gesbert, C.; Conjeaud, H. Structure of the Tetraspanin Main Extracellular
Domain: A Partially Conserved Fold with a Structurally Variable Domain Insertion. J. Biol. Chem. 2001 ,276, 40055–40064.
[CrossRef]
57. Poulter, J.A.; Ali, M.; Gilmour, D.F.; Rice, A.; Kondo, H.; Hayashi, K.; Mackey, D.A.; Kearns, L.S.; Ruddle, J.B.; Craig, J.E.; et al.
Mutations in TSPAN12 Cause Autosomal-Dominant Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 2010 ,86, 248–253.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
58. Charrin, S.; Jouannet, S.; Boucheix, C.; Rubinstein, E. Tetraspanins at a Glance. J. Cell Sci. 2014, 127, 3641–3648. [CrossRef]
59. Mohd Khair, S.Z.N.; Ismail, A.S.; Embong, Z.; Mohamed Yusoff, A.A. Detection of FZD4, LRP5 and TSPAN12 Genes Variants in
Malay Premature Babies with Retinopathy of Prematurity. J. Ophthalmic Vis. Res. 2019, 14, 171–178. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60. Zhang, C.; Lai, M.B.; Pedler, M.G.; Johnson, V .; Adams, R.H.; Petrash, J.M.; Chen, Z.; Junge, H.J. Endothelial Cell–Speciﬁc
Inactivation of TSPAN12 (Tetraspanin 12) Reveals Pathological Consequences of Barrier Defects in an Otherwise Intact Vasculature.
Arter. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 2018, 38, 2691–2705. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
61. Nikopoulos, K.; Gilissen, C.; Hoischen, A.; Erik van Nouhuys, C.; Boonstra, F.N.; Blokland, E.A.W.; Arts, P .; Wieskamp, N.; Strom,
T.M.; Ayuso, C.; et al. Next-Generation Sequencing of a 40 Mb Linkage Interval Reveals TSPAN12 Mutations in Patients with
Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 2010, 86, 240–247. [CrossRef]
62. Junge, H.J.; Yang, S.; Burton, J.B.; Paes, K.; Shu, X.; French, D.M.; Costa, M.; Rice, D.S.; Ye, W. TSPAN12 Regulates Retinal Vascular
Development by Promoting Norrin- but Not Wnt-Induced FZD4/ -Catenin Signaling. Cell 2009 ,139, 299–311. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
63. Harel, T.; Yesil, G.; Bayram, Y.; Coban-Akdemir, Z.; Charng, W.L.; Karaca, E.; Al Asmari, A.; Eldomery, M.K.; Hunter, J.V .;
Jhangiani, S.N.; et al. Monoallelic and Biallelic Variants in EMC1 Identiﬁed in Individuals with Global Developmental Delay,
Hypotonia, Scoliosis, and Cerebellar Atrophy. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 2016, 98, 562–570. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64. Chen, C.S.; Hong, S.; Indra, I.; Sergeeva, A.P .; Troyanovsky, R.B.; Shapiro, L.; Honig, B.; Troyanovsky, S.M. -Catenin-Mediated
Cadherin Clustering Couples Cadherin and Actin Dynamics. J. Cell Biol. 2015, 210, 647–661. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65. Majewski, I.J.; Kluijt, I.; Cats, A.; Scerri, T.S.; de Jong, D.; Kluin, R.J.C.; Hansford, S.; Hogervorst, F.B.L.; Bosma, A.J.; Hoﬂand, I.;
et al. An -E-Catenin (CTNNA1) Mutation in Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer. J. Pathol. 2013, 229, 621–629. [CrossRef]
66. Piao, H.-L.; Yuan, Y.; Wang, M.; Sun, Y.; Liang, H.; Ma, L. -Catenin Acts as a Tumour Suppressor in E-Cadherin-Negative
Basal-like Breast Cancer by Inhibiting NF-KB Signalling. Nat. Cell Biol. 2014, 16, 245–254. [CrossRef]
67. Saksens, N.T.M.; Krebs, M.P .; Schoenmaker-Koller, F.E.; Hicks, W.; Yu, M.; Shi, L.; Rowe, L.; Collin, G.B.; Charette, J.R.; Letteboer,
S.J.; et al. Mutations in CTNNA1 Cause Butterﬂy-Shaped Pigment Dystrophy and Perturbed Retinal Pigment Epithelium Integrity.
Nat. Genet. 2016, 48, 144–151. [CrossRef]Cells 2023, 12, 2579 20 of 20
68. Jumper, J.; Evans, R.; Pritzel, A.; Green, T.; Figurnov, M.; Ronneberger, O.; Tunyasuvunakool, K.; Bates, R.; Žídek, A.; Potapenko,
A.; et al. Highly Accurate Protein Structure Prediction with AlphaFold. Nature 2021, 596, 583–589. [CrossRef]
69. Varadi, M.; Anyango, S.; Deshpande, M.; Nair, S.; Natassia, C.; Yordanova, G.; Yuan, D.; Stroe, O.; Wood, G.; Laydon, A.;
et al. AlphaFold Protein Structure Database: Massively Expanding the Structural Coverage of Protein-Sequence Space with
High-Accuracy Models. Nucleic Acids Res. 2022, 50, D439–D444. [CrossRef]
70. Alharatani, R.; Ververi, A.; Beleza-Meireles, A.; Ji, W.; Mis, E.; Patterson, Q.T.; Grifﬁn, J.N.; Bhujel, N.; Chang, C.A.; Dixit, A.;
et al. Novel Truncating Mutations in CTNND1 Cause a Dominant Craniofacial and Cardiac Syndrome. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2020 ,
29, 1900. [CrossRef]
71. Ishiyama, N.; Lee, S.H.; Liu, S.; Li, G.Y.; Smith, M.J.; Reichardt, L.F.; Ikura, M. Dynamic and Static Interactions between P120
Catenin and E-Cadherin Regulate the Stability of Cell-Cell Adhesion. Cell2010, 141, 117–128. [CrossRef]
72. Anastasiadis, P .Z.; Moon, S.Y.; Thoreson, M.A.; Mariner, D.J.; Crawford, H.C.; Zheng, Y.; Reynolds, A.B. Inhibition of RhoA by
P120 Catenin. Nat. Cell Biol. 2000, 2, 637–644. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
73. Park, J.I.; Kim, S.W.; Lyons, J.P .; Ji, H.; Nguyen, T.T.; Cho, K.; Barton, M.C.; Deroo, T.; Vleminckx, K.; McCrea, P .D. Kaiso/P120-
Catenin and TCF/ -Catenin Complexes Coordinately Regulate Canonical Wnt Gene Targets. Dev. Cell 2005 ,8, 843–854. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.