Citation: Ashourizadeh, H.; Fakhri,
M.; Hassanpour, K.; Masoudi, A.;
Jalali, S.; Roshandel, D.; Chen, F.K.
Pearls and Pitfalls of Adaptive Optics
Ophthalmoscopy in Inherited Retinal
Diseases. Diagnostics 2023, 13, 2413.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
diagnostics13142413
Academic Editors: Rajiv Raman
and Isabel Pinilla
Received: 1 June 2023
Revised: 12 July 2023
Accepted: 18 July 2023
Published: 19 July 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
diagnostics
Review
Pearls and Pitfalls of Adaptive Optics Ophthalmoscopy in
Inherited Retinal Diseases
Helia Ashourizadeh1,†
, Maryam Fakhri2, Kiana Hassanpour2
, Ali Masoudi3, Sattar Jalali4,
Danial Roshandel5,6,†
and Fred K. Chen5,6,7,8,*
1Department of Ophthalmology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA; ashourizadeh.helia@mayo.edu
2Ophthalmic Research Center, Research Institute for Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences,
Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran 16666, Iran; maryam.fakhri88@gmail.com (M.F.);
kiana.hassanpour@gmail.com (K.H.)
3Stein Eye Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA;
masoudi.a@umsu.ac.ir
4Department of Physics, Central Tehran Branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran 19558, Iran;
sahab.jalali@gmail.com
5Centre for Ophthalmology and Visual Science, The University of Western Australia,
Nedlands, WA 6009, Australia; danial.roshandel@lei.org.au
6Ocular Tissue Engineering Laboratory, Lions Eye Institute, Nedlands, WA 6009, Australia
7Centre for Eye Research Australia, Royal Victorian Eye and Ear Hospital, Melbourne, VIC 3002, Australia
8Ophthalmology, Department of Surgery, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia
*Correspondence: fred.chen@uwa.edu.au
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract: Adaptive optics (AO) retinal imaging enables individual photoreceptors to be visualized
in the clinical setting. AO imaging can be a powerful clinical tool for detecting photoreceptor
degeneration at a cellular level that might be overlooked through conventional structural assessments,
such as spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT). Therefore, AO imaging has gained
signiﬁcant interest in the study of photoreceptor degeneration, one of the most common causes of
inherited blindness. Growing evidence supports that AO imaging may be useful for diagnosing early-
stage retinal dystrophy before it becomes apparent on fundus examination or conventional retinal
imaging. In addition, serial AO imaging may detect structural disease progression in early-stage
disease over a shorter period compared to SD-OCT. Although AO imaging is gaining popularity as a
structural endpoint in clinical trials, the results should be interpreted with caution due to several
pitfalls, including the lack of standardized imaging and image analysis protocols, frequent ocular
comorbidities that affect image quality, and signiﬁcant interindividual variation of normal values.
Herein, we summarize the current state-of-the-art AO imaging and review its potential applications,
limitations, and pitfalls in patients with inherited retinal diseases.
Keywords: adaptive optics; photoreceptor; retinal dystrophy; inherited retinal disease; rod-cone dystrophy
1. Introduction
Incorporation of the adaptive optics (AO) technology into ophthalmic devices has led
to the development of non-invasive ultra-high-resolution imaging of retinal cells and blood
vessels with minimal image degradation by higher-order monochromatic aberrations. AO
was ﬁrst incorporated into ophthalmoscopy by Liang et al. in 1997 [ 1], and since then,
it has gained popularity as a structural endpoint in clinical trials (www.ClinicalTrials.
gov; NCT03349242, NCT00254605, and NCT01866371; accessed on 15 December 2022).
Notable knowledge advances have been made by using AO in the early detection of
retinal abnormalities. Numerous studies demonstrated that AO could detect early changes
in photoreceptor density before visible clinical signs or abnormalities in conventional
imaging techniques [ 2,3]. Collecting indirectly scattered light from adjacent cells with
Diagnostics 2023, 13, 2413. https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics13142413 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/diagnosticsDiagnostics 2023, 13, 2413 2 of 23
different refractive indices, AO can also provide valuable information on retinal vasculature.
High-contrast perfusion maps provide information on retinal blood vessels’ structure,
including lumen width, wall thickness and wall-to-lumen ratio, branching, tortuosity,
microaneurysms, as well as function, such as resting and stimulus-evoked changes in blood
ﬂow (neurovascular coupling) [ 4–6]. Additionally, the unique capabilities of AO optical
coherence tomography angiography (OCTA) in quantitative imaging of choriocapillaris
has been demonstrated in inherited retinal diseases (IRDs) [7].
IRDs comprises a wide range of retinal degenerations, which collectively is the leading
cause of visual disability and legal blindness in the working-age population [ 8]. Cur-
rently, one gene-based therapy has been approved for the treatment of RPE65-associated
retinopathy [ 9,10] while gene-based therapies for other IRD genes are still under investi-
gation [ 11,12]. AO retinal imaging can be useful for tracking a disease’s natural history at
the cellular level and deﬁning outcome measures for therapeutic interventions in clinical
trials [ 13]. Despite the lack of a standardized imaging protocol and image analysis methods
in AO, the detailed visualization of retinal cell survival provided by AO offers potential
applications in measuring efﬁcacy in stem cell and gene-targeted therapies. This compre-
hensive review discusses the main concepts of AO in ophthalmic imaging, its ﬁndings in
IRDs, and the pitfalls and limitations of AO in research and clinical practice.
2. Basic Concepts
2.1. Principles of Adaptive Optics
As ﬁrst conceptualized by astronomer Horace Babcock in the 1920s, atmospheric
media cause turbulences in the light waves originating from stars, which leads to low
image resolution in ground-based telescopes [ 14]. Similarly, distortions and irregularities
on the ocular surface and within the eye make it an imperfect optical system. There are
three key components in every AO system, which detect aberrations in real time and adapt
to enhance the image quality. A wavefront sensor detects the optical aberrations, and a
wavefront corrector compensates for the aberrations. The controlling system coordinates
the sensor and controller to provide the best image quality with low aberrations. In
sensor-based AO, also known as hardware AO, wavefront sensors are used to measure the
aberrations of the reﬂected light after passing through the ocular media and cornea. The
calculated aberration is transferred to the controller and translates into signals to be sent to
a deformable mirror and acts as a guide to ongoing corrective changes of the mirror. Then,
the modiﬁed wavefront is detected by the camera and a high-resolution image is captured
(Figure 1).
In sensorless AO and computational AO systems, aberrations are detected based on
optimization algorithms, and the distortion degree of the wavefront is estimated according
to the properties of multiple serially taken consecutive images. Sensorless AO has a major
drawback in terms of speed since it necessitates a series of images to gauge and adjust a
speciﬁc set of aberration modes. Sensor-based AO systems are more optically complex
and costly devices with almost 10 times higher speeds compared to sensorless AO [ 15].
However, the retinal images captured through sensorless adaptive optics are comparable
to those obtained with wavefront sensor-based control [16].
2.2. Technologies and Devices
2.2.1. AO Flood Illumination Ophthalmoscopy (AOFIO)
The only commercially available AO fundus camera (rtx1, Imagine Eyes, Orsay, France)
illuminates a small region of the retina and captures 40 images from a 44ﬁeld over
2 or 4 s (19 or 9.5 frames per second, respectively). Since each image is acquired in
milliseconds, ﬁne ocular movements do not affect image quality. Artifact-free images are
aligned and blended using built-in software to increase the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). The
processed image is a magniﬁed high-resolution image of cone photoreceptors or retinal
vessels (Figure 2) [17]. This device gives an enface image of a 44ﬁeld of retina,
corresponding to a 1.2 1.2 mm square. Each acquisition lasts 4 s (2 s in the upgradedDiagnostics 2023, 13, 2413 3 of 23
version) during which 40 live images are taken. Using the cross-correlation method and
automated reference frame selection by the image processing software provided by the
device’s manufacturer (AOdetect), in every series of raw image sequences, poor-quality
images are omitted, and frames with acceptable resolution and the least distortion are
averaged to give a ﬁnal image with the highest amount of signal-to-noise ratio [18,19].
Diagnostics 2023,  13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 24 
 
  
Figure 1. Schematic view of the adaptive optics retinal camera. The aberrated wavefront exits the 
eye ( A), and the aberrations are corre cted by a deformable mirror ( B). The resultant image is divided 
by a beam spli tter (C) and equally received by a wavefront sensor ( D) measures the residual aber-
rations of the image corrected by the deformable  mirror. Aberrometry data are analyzed by com-
puter software ( E), which adjusts the deformab le mirror, and this loop (B > C > D > E > B) continues 
working until the least amount of aberration is  detected by the wavefront sensor, when the ﬁnal 
image will be captured and recorded by the retinal camera ( F). 
In sensorless AO and computational AO systems, aberrations are detected based on 
optimization algorithms, and the distortion de gree of the wavefront is estimated accord-
ing to the properties of multiple  serially taken consecutive images. Sensorless AO has a 
major drawback in terms of speed since it ne cessitates a series of images to gauge and 
adjust a speci ﬁc set of aberration modes. Sensor-based AO systems are more optically 
complex and costly devices with almost 10 times higher speeds compared to sensorless 
AO [15]. However, the retinal images captur ed through sensorless adaptive optics are 
comparable to those obtained with wavefront sensor-based control [16]. 
2.2. Technologies and Devices 
2.2.1. AO Flood Illumination Ophthalmoscopy (AOFIO) 
The only commercially available AO fundus  camera (rtx1, Imagine Eyes, Orsay, 
France) illuminates a small region of the retina and captures 40 images from a 4° × 4° ﬁeld 
over 2 or 4 s (19 or 9.5 frames per second, re spectively). Since each image is acquired in 
milliseconds, ﬁne ocular movements do not a ﬀect image quality. Artifact-free images are 
aligned and blended using built-in software to increase the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). 
The processed image is a magni ﬁed high-resolution image of cone photoreceptors or ret-
inal vessels (Figure 2) [17]. This device  gives an enface image of a 4° × 4° ﬁeld of retina, 
corresponding to a 1.2 × 1.2 mm square. Each acquisition lasts 4 s (2 s in the upgraded version) during which 40 live images are taken. Using the cross-correlation method and 
automated reference frame selection by the image processing software provided by the device’s manufacturer (AOdetect), in every se ries of raw image sequences, poor-quality 
images are omitt ed, and frames with acceptable resolution and the least distortion are 
averaged to give a ﬁnal image with the highest amount of signal-to-noise ratio [18,19]. 
Figure 1. Schematic view of the adaptive optics retinal camera. The aberrated wavefront exits the eye
(A), and the aberrations are corrected by a deformable mirror ( B). The resultant image is divided by a
beam splitter ( C) and equally received by a wavefront sensor ( D) measures the residual aberrations of
the image corrected by the deformable mirror. Aberrometry data are analyzed by computer software
(E), which adjusts the deformable mirror, and this loop (B > C > D > E > B) continues working until
the least amount of aberration is detected by the wavefront sensor, when the ﬁnal image will be
captured and recorded by the retinal camera (F).
Diagnostics 2023,  13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 24 
 
  
Figure 2. Comparison of the magni ﬁed infrared re ﬂectance (IR) image taken by SLO camera 
(A,B,D,E) with AO image taken by rtx1 AO camera ( C,F). Red arrows in F show the internal and 
external boundaries of the vessels wall. Red (A) and yellow (D) boxes represent the magni ﬁed area 
shown in panels B-C and E-F, respectively. 
Images from adjacent ﬁelds may be captured and montaged to create a map of the 
cone mosaic or retinal vasculature. The major drawback of AOFIO is that light sca ttered 
from adjacent structures may reduce the contra st of the image (axial resolution is about 
300 µm). In addition, although the theoretical resolution of AOFIO is 1.5 µm, the actual 
resolution is not high enough to visualize small cones with the highest packing density 
located within the central 2° of the fovea, as well as rod photoreceptors, which have a 
diameter of 1–2 µm. In additi on, measurements might be a ﬀected by a large number of 
intervening rods beyond 6° from the fovea. He nce, although cones might be visualized at 
closer than 200 µm from the fovea (within 1°) and rods might be faintly visible in ideal conditions [20], the usefulness of AOFIO is generally limited to eccentricities between 2° 
and 5° [21]. 
2.2.2. AO Scanning Laser Ophthalmoscopy (AOSLO) 
In contrast to AOFIO, AOSLO devices are no t yet commercially av ailable. In AOSLO, 
small regions (approximately 1.5° × 1.5°) of the retina are illuminated, and backscatt ered 
lights are detected at the same plane as the illumination. Hence, AOSLO produces images 
with higher contrast compared to AOFIO and permits visualization of rods and foveal 
cones with a transverse and axial resolution of about 2.5 µm and 100 µm, respectively. 
However, the small scanning ﬁeld requires more scans to obtain cone mosaics, which re-
quires the time-consuming task of creating montages to allow identi ﬁcation of landmarks 
for image registration [22]. While both AOFIO and confocal AOSLO (cAOSLO) rely on the reﬂectivity of the photoreceptors (which depe nds on their intact structure and waveguide 
properties) for visualization, non-confocal  split-detector AOSLO (SD-AOSLO) shows the 
cone inner segment ellipsoid independent of re ﬂectivity/waveguiding. Hence, SD-AOSLO 
can show cones without the time and morphology-dependent re ﬂectivity changes. How-
ever, SD-AOSLO is unable to resolve rods [23]. Table 1 provides major diﬀ erences between 
AOFIO and AOSLO. 
Table 1.  Comparison of Flood Illumination and Scanning Laser Ophthalmoscope . 
 FIO SLO 
Availability Commercial Research custom-made 
Field Large (4°) Small (0.2–1.0°) 
Illumination Diﬀuse Focused single spot 
Figure 2. Comparison of the magniﬁed infrared reﬂectance (IR) image taken by SLO camera ( A,B,D,E)
with AO image taken by rtx1 AO camera ( C,F). Red arrows in F show the internal and external
boundaries of the vessels wall. Red ( A) and yellow ( D) boxes represent the magniﬁed area shown in
panels (B,C) and (E,F), respectively.Diagnostics 2023, 13, 2413 4 of 23
Images from adjacent ﬁelds may be captured and montaged to create a map of the
cone mosaic or retinal vasculature. The major drawback of AOFIO is that light scattered
from adjacent structures may reduce the contrast of the image (axial resolution is about
300m). In addition, although the theoretical resolution of AOFIO is 1.5 m, the actual
resolution is not high enough to visualize small cones with the highest packing density
located within the central 2of the fovea, as well as rod photoreceptors, which have a
diameter of 1–2 m. In addition, measurements might be affected by a large number of
intervening rods beyond 6from the fovea. Hence, although cones might be visualized
at closer than 200 m from the fovea (within 1) and rods might be faintly visible in ideal
conditions [ 20], the usefulness of AOFIO is generally limited to eccentricities between 2
and 5[21].
2.2.2. AO Scanning Laser Ophthalmoscopy (AOSLO)
In contrast to AOFIO, AOSLO devices are not yet commercially available. In AOSLO,
small regions (approximately 1.51.5) of the retina are illuminated, and backscattered
lights are detected at the same plane as the illumination. Hence, AOSLO produces images
with higher contrast compared to AOFIO and permits visualization of rods and foveal cones
with a transverse and axial resolution of about 2.5 m and 100 m, respectively. However,
the small scanning ﬁeld requires more scans to obtain cone mosaics, which requires the
time-consuming task of creating montages to allow identiﬁcation of landmarks for image
registration [ 22]. While both AOFIO and confocal AOSLO (cAOSLO) rely on the reﬂectivity
of the photoreceptors (which depends on their intact structure and waveguide properties)
for visualization, non-confocal split-detector AOSLO (SD-AOSLO) shows the cone inner
segment ellipsoid independent of reﬂectivity/waveguiding. Hence, SD-AOSLO can show
cones without the time and morphology-dependent reﬂectivity changes. However, SD-
AOSLO is unable to resolve rods [ 23]. Table 1provides major differences between AOFIO
and AOSLO.
Table 1. Comparison of Flood Illumination and Scanning Laser Ophthalmoscope.
FIO SLO
Availability Commercial Research custom-made
Field Large (4) Small (0.2–1.0)
Illumination Diffuse Focused single spot
Imaging technique Single ﬂash Scanning laser
Transverse resolution 2–3m 1–2m
Axial resolution 200–300 m 100m
Motion artefacts Low high
Visible structures
Cones YesaYes
Rods No Yes
RPE YesbYes
RGC NocYes
Retinal vessels Yes Yes
Choriocapillaris NocYes
aUnable to resolve foveal cones in the central 1–2.bOnly by transscleral illumination.cMight be visualized
using multiply scattered light [ 23]. FIO: ﬂood illumination ophthalmoscopy, SLO: scanning laser ophthalmoscopy,
RGC: retinal ganglion cells, RNFL: retinal nerve ﬁber layer.Diagnostics 2023, 13, 2413 5 of 23
2.2.3. AO Optical Coherence Tomography (AO-OCT)
AO-OCT provides a ﬁve-times higher lateral resolution in comparison to conventional
SD-OCT [ 24,25], and a better axial resolution than AOSLO [ 26], which confers a distinct
beneﬁt compared to conventional OCT as well as SLO and FIO. It also has an increased
signal-to-noise ratio, smaller speckle size, and increased sensitivity to weak reﬂections, all
of which enable more precise and accurate detection and visualization of microscopic struc-
tures in the retina [ 27]. Image quality is limited due to high rates of motion artifacts from
high magniﬁcation and during the time-consuming image acquisition. By recording en face
OCT and SLO images simultaneously and correcting transverse motion with SLO images,
higher lateral and axial resolution with minor residual motion artifacts can be achieved [ 28].
Using a Wavefront sensorless AO-OCT on non-mydriatic pupils, the photoreceptor mosaic
at eccentricities as small as 1could be visualized [29].
3. Acquisition, Analysis, and Interpretation
3.1. Image Acquisition Protocols
Multiple factors, such as focus plane, imaging pattern, and imaging area, should be
considered when obtaining the highest-quality image at the desired region (s) of interest.
These factors will be further elaborated in the next sections.
3.1.1. Photoreceptor
The level of focus for photoreceptor imaging ranges between 40 and 100 m proximal
to the Bruch’s membrane. The choice of imaged area depends on the purpose of the imaging.
Localized imaging can be used to measure cone parameters at a speciﬁc predeﬁned location
(s) for structure–function correlation or natural history studies. Alternatively, wider areas
can be imaged to produce topographic cone mosaic maps (Figure 3). The test duration
and scan area should be balanced to reduce patient discomfort and fatigue. Although
AOFIO captures relatively larger retinal areas compared to AOSLO, the image quality may
degrade toward the edges of the image frame. Hence, many researchers use overlapping
image tiles to overcome this potential limitation. Different imaging protocols have been
used by rtx1 users. The operator adjusts the internal ﬁxation target to shift a patient’s
gaze systematically through a series of coordinates to allow methodical acquisition of
images at various retinal loci of interest. For visualizing photoreceptors in larger areas,
multiple AO images with overlapping regions are required to create a wide-ﬁeld AO
montage. A cluster of consecutive images with 0.5to 2of overlap are used to create
the wide-ﬁeld AO montage. Different imaging patterns may be used depending on the
purpose of the imaging (Figure 3). For example, imaging of the central 3(Figure 3A) is
useful for detecting photoreceptor changes in the fovea in early-stage maculopathy, while
extended ﬁelds (Figure 3B–D) are required in peripheral photoreceptor diseases, such as
retinitis pigmentosa (RP). The time required for this process is even greater for AOSLO
systems where the ﬁeld of view can be smaller than 11in each single image. As in
AOFIO, AOSLO devices capture multiple images from the same retinal area at the same
time. Each image set is called a “tile”, and usually 50–150 tiles are acquired in a single
session of imaging [ 30]. Montaging can be performed either manually by expert graders
or automatically.
Manual montaging is a time-consuming process through which a human expert aligns
overlapped tiles to each other via photo editing software packages to produce the ﬁnal
wide-ﬁeld montage image. Then, the region of interest (ROI) is selected on the montage
image for which cone metrics will then be extracted. Automatic montaging is a feature-
based image stitching that predicts which two images should be aligned together according
to detected key points and descriptors. The process can take as long as minutes to hours
based on image qualities and the applied algorithm. Many devices rely on scale invariant
feature transform (SIFT) [ 31], but newer oriented rotated fast brief (ORB) features has been
reported to be much faster while maintaining accuracy and the ﬁnal quality of montage
image [30].Diagnostics 2023, 13, 2413 6 of 23
Diagnostics 2023,  13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 24 
 
 extended ﬁelds (Figure 3B–D) are required in peripheral photoreceptor diseases, such as 
retinitis pigmentosa (RP). The time required for this process is even greater for AOSLO 
systems where the ﬁeld of view can be smaller than 1° × 1° in each single image. As in 
AOFIO, AOSLO devices capture multiple images  from the same retinal area at the same 
time. Each image set is called a “tile”, and usually 50–150 tiles are acquired in a single 
session of imaging [30]. Montaging can be performed either manually by expert graders 
or automatically. 
 
Figure 3. Examples of montage created from di ﬀerent AO image acquisit ion sequences. Overlap-
ping images were taken to cover the central 3° from the fovea using 4 image acquisitions ( A), the 
central 6° using 12 (B ) or 16 (C ) image acquisitions, and the extend ed imaging along the horizontal 
and vertical meridians (up to 9° ) using 20 image acquisitions ( D). Green dots represent the foveal 
center. 
Manual montaging is a time-consuming process through which a human expert 
aligns overlapped tiles to each other via phot o editing software packages to produce the 
ﬁnal wide- ﬁeld montage image. Then, the region of interest (ROI) is selected on the mon-
tage image for which cone metrics will then be extracted. Automatic montaging is a fea-
ture-based image stitching that predicts which two images should be aligned together 
according to detected key points and descriptor s. The process can take as long as minutes 
to hours based on image qualities and the applied algorithm. Many devices rely on scale invariant feature transform (SIFT) [31], but newer oriented rotated fast brief (ORB) fea-
tures has been reported to be much faster while maintaining accuracy and the ﬁnal quality 
of montage image [30]. 
3.1.2. Blood Vessel 
Blood vessel imaging can be more challenging as there is no standard method for 
evaluation of the retinal vessels. Like phot oreceptor imaging, an AOFIO camera can be 
used for blood vessel imaging using a single image frame or multiple overlapping images. 
The focus plane should be set at approxim ately 250 µm proximal to the Bruch’s mem-
brane, which is equivalent to the retinal nerve ﬁber layer. Factors, such as distance from 
Figure 3. Examples of montage created from different AO image acquisition sequences. Overlapping
images were taken to cover the central 3from the fovea using 4 image acquisitions ( A), the central 6
using 12 ( B) or 16 ( C) image acquisitions, and the extended imaging along the horizontal and vertical
meridians (up to 9) using 20 image acquisitions (D). Green dots represent the foveal center.
3.1.2. Blood Vessel
Blood vessel imaging can be more challenging as there is no standard method for
evaluation of the retinal vessels. Like photoreceptor imaging, an AOFIO camera can be
used for blood vessel imaging using a single image frame or multiple overlapping images.
The focus plane should be set at approximately 250 m proximal to the Bruch’s membrane,
which is equivalent to the retinal nerve ﬁber layer. Factors, such as distance from the optic
nerve margin and the number of bifurcations, should be taken into account when selecting
the region of interest.
Findings on retinal vasculature can be a potential marker for systemic vascular health.
However, retinal vessel imaging due to a multi-plane arrangement of vessels can be
challenging with conventional imaging modalities. Fluorescein angiography as the clinical
gold standard for retinal vascular diseases is invasive and possesses some limitations.
By contrast, vascular imaging using adaptive optics imaging as a non-invasive method
can be challenging due to the lack of standard metrics and protocols. Without using any
exogenous contrast agents, measuring the parafoveal capillary leukocyte velocity by non-
confocal AOSLO and the use of motion contrast to create non-invasive parafoveal perfusion
maps provides a high-resolution image of the retinal capillary network [ 32,33]. Tam et al.
evaluated the parafoveal capillary network by capturing videos at 512 512 pixels in the
ﬁeld-of-view range of 1.2to 2.5for 5 to 40 s [ 33]. Limitations of this method would be the
motion artifacts and difﬁculty in detecting the slow perfusion vessels, which are in fact of
great importance in the clinical practice [34].Diagnostics 2023, 13, 2413 7 of 23
3.2. Image Analysis
3.2.1. Photoreceptor
Analysis of the photoreceptor mosaic starts with manual or automated detection and
labeling of the cells. Though widely accepted, manual labeling is time-consuming and
difﬁcult to use for a large set of data, especially in the presence of diminished image quality
or a pathology [ 35,36]. Semi-automated techniques require manual correction by an experi-
enced observer to achieve optimum results. One of the most commonly used methods is
detecting the regional maxima (pixels with the highest values in their neighborhood) of the
photoreceptors’ centers followed by generating Voronoi tessellation by setting edges that
connect these points using a MATLAB-based image processing technique [ 37]. Another
method is the use of the circle Hough transform for the detection of circular structures [ 38].
To date, automated counting techniques have undergone signiﬁcant modiﬁcations, and
fully automatic or deep learning algorithms are available to detect and segment photore-
ceptors in both confocal and non-confocal AO imaging [ 39–41]. After all the steps of
image registration, processing, or montaging are passed, images are sent to the analyzing
software for automatic photoreceptor detection and calculation of the mean, maximum,
and minimum of numeric values as well as percentage values and standard deviation of
corresponding metrics in a deﬁned area. In the rtx1 camera, two software packages are pro-
vided by the manufacturers, which are AODetect for photoreceptor analysis and AODetect
Artery for the retinal vasculature analysis (Imagine Eyes; Orsay, Paris, France). The ROI is
selected and deﬁned by the operator by manually moving a frame with an adjustable size
on the ﬁnal high-resolution image. Relative to the location of the peak foveal cone density,
which is deﬁned on the montage image, the selected size of each frame for ROI may vary
depending on its eccentricity. The eccentricity of each region is calculated as the relative
distance between the center of that frame and the foveal center (which is considered as the
reference point with ﬁxation coordinates of x= 0,y= 0) and is expressed in degrees or
micrometers [ 42]. Using algorithms based on segmentation and Delaunay triangulation,
the location, size, and shape of cones are automatically detected, and a color-coded mosaic
heat map can be produced in which hotter colors represent higher cone densities [ 43]. A
cone-packing arrangement is analyzed using Voronoi diagrams [ 37]. Each Voronoi cell can
be coded by a speciﬁc color according to the number of its neighbors, giving color-coded
Voronoi domains [ 42]. Cones located at the edges of the selected frame, Voronoi cells of
which are not fully within the ROI, are not considered for metric calculations (Figure 4).
Diagnostics 2023,  13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 24 
 
  
Figure 4. AO imaging using rtx1 device ( A). The region of interest (yellow square in panel A) was 
used for automated cone detection ( B) and segmentation ( C) by AODetect software. Cone mosaic 
parameters are shown in (D ). The analysis was performed at superior 2° ( 2S) from the fovea. White 
squares in panels B and C represent the analysis area. 
The intensity of photoreceptor signals is also important while interpreting an AO ret-
inal image. There is still debate about the exac t origin of these bright signals, which lead 
to various waveguiding properties and the re ﬂection of cones in a mosaic map. It has been 
stated that conditions a ﬀecting outer segment integrity and the contact of photoreceptors 
to the RPE apical process diminish intensity of backscatt ered light from the photorecep-
tor–RPE interface and result in lower re ﬂectivity of cones [44,45].  Further factors, which 
have been accounted for in the cone-re ﬂectivity variation in AOSLO images, are di ﬀerent 
segments length and diameter as well as  coherence of the light source [46,47]. 
3.2.2. Blood Vessel 
Internal and external boundaries of blood vessel walls may be marked manually or 
using automated software (Figure 5). AODete ct (artery mode) provides automatic wall 
segmentation and thickness computation with a manual adjustment. Once a point on a 
vessel is selected manually, the system will dete ct the rest of the object by itself. Mehta et 
al., using AODetect Artery, calculated the intra-observer variability for the wall-to-lumen 
ratio (WLR) and the cross-sectional area of the vascular wall (WCSA) and reported an 
excellent consistency [44]. Segmentation of the foveal avascular zone (FAZ) using a semi-
automated procedure to extract the vessels ce nterline has been performed semi-automat-
ically by Tam et al. based on the Frangi vesselness measure [33,45] Several deep learning 
models for automated vessel segmentation have also been introduced [46,47]. 
 
Figure 5. The internal and external vessel wall boundari es are marked automatically by the AODe-
tect software ( A) and adjusted manually if required. The boundaries are determined based on the 
peak signals ( B) and measurements, including lumen diamet er, total diameter, wall thicknesses, 
wall cross-sectional area (WCSA), and wall-to-lume n ration (WLR), which are provided in microns 
(C). 
3.3. Outcome Measures 
Figure 4. AO imaging using rtx1 device ( A). The region of interest (yellow square in panel ( A)) was
used for automated cone detection ( B) and segmentation ( C) by AODetect software. Cone mosaic
parameters are shown in ( D). The analysis was performed at superior 2(2S) from the fovea. White
squares in panels (B,C) represent the analysis area.
The intensity of photoreceptor signals is also important while interpreting an AO
retinal image. There is still debate about the exact origin of these bright signals, which
lead to various waveguiding properties and the reﬂection of cones in a mosaic map. It
has been stated that conditions affecting outer segment integrity and the contact of pho-
toreceptors to the RPE apical process diminish intensity of backscattered light from the
photoreceptor–RPE interface and result in lower reﬂectivity of cones [ 44,45]. Further fac-Diagnostics 2023, 13, 2413 8 of 23
tors, which have been accounted for in the cone-reﬂectivity variation in AOSLO images,
are different segments length and diameter as well as coherence of the light source [ 46,47].
3.2.2. Blood Vessel
Internal and external boundaries of blood vessel walls may be marked manually or
using automated software (Figure 5). AODetect (artery mode) provides automatic wall
segmentation and thickness computation with a manual adjustment. Once a point on a
vessel is selected manually, the system will detect the rest of the object by itself. Mehta et al.,
using AODetect Artery, calculated the intra-observer variability for the wall-to-lumen ratio
(WLR) and the cross-sectional area of the vascular wall (WCSA) and reported an excellent
consistency [ 44]. Segmentation of the foveal avascular zone (FAZ) using a semi-automated
procedure to extract the vessels centerline has been performed semi-automatically by Tam
et al. based on the Frangi vesselness measure [ 33,45] Several deep learning models for
automated vessel segmentation have also been introduced [46,47].
Diagnostics 2023,  13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 24 
 
  
Figure 4. AO imaging using rtx1 device ( A). The region of interest (yellow square in panel A) was 
used for automated cone detection ( B) and segmentation ( C) by AODetect software. Cone mosaic 
parameters are shown in (D ). The analysis was performed at superior 2° ( 2S) from the fovea. White 
squares in panels B and C represent the analysis area. 
The intensity of photoreceptor signals is also important while interpreting an AO ret-
inal image. There is still debate about the exac t origin of these bright signals, which lead 
to various waveguiding properties and the re ﬂection of cones in a mosaic map. It has been 
stated that conditions a ﬀecting outer segment integrity and the contact of photoreceptors 
to the RPE apical process diminish intensity of backscatt ered light from the photorecep-
tor–RPE interface and result in lower re ﬂectivity of cones [44,45].  Further factors, which 
have been accounted for in the cone-re ﬂectivity variation in AOSLO images, are di ﬀerent 
segments length and diameter as well as  coherence of the light source [46,47]. 
3.2.2. Blood Vessel 
Internal and external boundaries of blood vessel walls may be marked manually or 
using automated software (Figure 5). AODete ct (artery mode) provides automatic wall 
segmentation and thickness computation with a manual adjustment. Once a point on a 
vessel is selected manually, the system will dete ct the rest of the object by itself. Mehta et 
al., using AODetect Artery, calculated the intra-observer variability for the wall-to-lumen 
ratio (WLR) and the cross-sectional area of the vascular wall (WCSA) and reported an 
excellent consistency [44]. Segmentation of the foveal avascular zone (FAZ) using a semi-
automated procedure to extract the vessels ce nterline has been performed semi-automat-
ically by Tam et al. based on the Frangi vesselness measure [33,45] Several deep learning 
models for automated vessel segmentation have also been introduced [46,47]. 
 
Figure 5. The internal and external vessel wall boundari es are marked automatically by the AODe-
tect software ( A) and adjusted manually if required. The boundaries are determined based on the 
peak signals ( B) and measurements, including lumen diamet er, total diameter, wall thicknesses, 
wall cross-sectional area (WCSA), and wall-to-lume n ration (WLR), which are provided in microns 
(C). 
3.3. Outcome Measures 
Figure 5. The internal and external vessel wall boundaries are marked automatically by the AODetect
software ( A) and adjusted manually if required. The boundaries are determined based on the peak
signals ( B) and measurements, including lumen diameter, total diameter, wall thicknesses, wall
cross-sectional area (WCSA), and wall-to-lumen ration (WLR), which are provided in microns ( C).
3.3. Outcome Measures
3.3.1. Photoreceptor
Correlated metrics of the cone mosaic and their definitions are described in the following:
Cone density is the number of deﬁned Voronoi cells divided by the total area of the
Voronoi cells within that speciﬁc region.
Percentage of hexagonality is the ratio of the number of Voronoi cells with six sides to
the total number of Voronoi cells within that speciﬁc region.
Nearest neighbor distance (NND) and farthest neighbor distance (FND) are the distance
between the center of a single cone and its closest/farthest neighbor in the adjacent Voronoi
cell. These metrics are reported for an ROI as the average of NDD/FND of all Voronoi cells
within that speciﬁc region.
Intercell distance (ICD)/cone spacing is the average distance between a single cone (the
center of a Voronoi cell) and each of its neighbors (the center of adjacent Voronoi cell). The
reported ICD for an ROI is the average ICD for all the Voronoi cells in that speciﬁc region.
Number of neighbors regularity (NoNR) is the mean number of sides of all V oronoi cells in
an ROI divided by the SD of the number of sides of all V oronoi cells in that specific region.
Voronoi cell area regularity (VCAR) is the mean area of the bound Voronoi cells in an
ROI divided by the SD of the area of the Voronoi cells in that speciﬁc region.
Cone density and spacing are the most often used parameters as outcome measures in
different retinal pathologies. The reliability and variability of the measurements vary with
the device, location, and cone detection method. Using the commercial device (rtx1) and
software (AODetect) and manual adjustment by two independent graders, the intrasession
repeatability and intersession reproducibility of all cone parameters (including cone density)Diagnostics 2023, 13, 2413 9 of 23
were reported excellent in a normal population, with the inter-operator and intergrader
agreement greater than 95% for cone density and spacing [ 19]. Manual correction of
AODetect labeling has increased cone density by 6% [48].
Using a custom-built AOSLO device and cone detection software, the inter-observer
intraclass correlation coefﬁcients (ICCs) for cone density and hexagonal Voronoi domain
were 0.955 and 0.811 for normal eyes and 0.980 and 0.697 for eyes with RP , respectively [ 49].
Furthermore, the reliability and repeatability of split-detector AOSLO was 95.9% and 97.3%,
respectively, for STGD, and 88.5% and 94.5%, for RPGR-associated RP , which was greater
compared with confocal AOSLO [ 50]. In another study focused on cAOSLO-derived
cone spacing, ICC for the interobserver agreement was 0.838 and 0.892 in normal and
affected eyes, respectively. The ICC for inter-visit correlation was greater than 0.869 in
both groups [ 51]. Cone density might show higher inter-individual and intra-individual
eccentricity-dependent variability compared to spacing and hexagonality. Hence, a combi-
nation of all parameters is preferred over the use of a measure from the AO images [42].
3.3.2. Blood Vessel
Structural evaluation of retinal vasculature can be performed using several metrics.
The wall-to-lumen ratio (WLR) and cross-sectional area of the vascular wall (WCSA) are
common metrics for structural changes in retinal blood vessels and are calculated using
the outer and inner diameter of a blood vessel [ 52]. Using a rtx1 camera, Meixner et al.
measured WLR, and it was independent of the total vessel diameter and depended mainly
on the retinal vessel wall thickness [ 53]. Evidence shows that WLR is associated with age,
hypertension, body mass index, and the stage of retinal microvascular abnormalities [ 53–55].
Meta-analysis on seven studies showed no signiﬁcant difference in WCSA in hypertensive
versus normotensive patients [ 56]. Microvascular density is another metric, which is
calculated by dividing the total length of vessels in the ROI to the area of the region. Using
AOSLO, lower microvascular density has been observed in diabetic macular ischemia and
retinopathy [ 57]. Moreover, the bifurcation angle in the vascular-branching, tortuosity,
which is calculated as total squared curvature divided by the length of the vessel, and the
acircularity index of the FAZ as calculated by the perimeter of FAZ divided by the perimeter
of the circle with equal area have also been described as metrics in AO imaging [4–6] .
Functional evaluation is also feasible in measuring resting ﬂow and stimulus-evoked
changes in ﬂow [ 7]. It is possible to create measures of vascular change and use them as
biomarkers to disease progression and evaluate treatment response by tracking capillary
perfusion and microaneurysms longitudinally [58].
4. AO Imaging in Diagnosing Early-Stage IRDs
Recently, the signiﬁcant role of AO imaging has been highlighted in detecting the
earliest changes at the cellular level in retinal diseases including dystrophies, many of
which are detectable before clinical or pathologic ﬁndings of conventional retinal imaging
modalities. Additionally, a better understanding of the natural course of retinal changes in
dystrophic diseases can assist in the timely detection of patients who might be eligible for
gene-speciﬁc intervention and in better selection of patients for clinical trials.
4.1. Rod-Dominated Dystrophies
Using confocal AOSLO in patients with RP , several authors reported a signiﬁcant loss
of cones in the central retina where the outer nuclear layer (ONL), ellipsoid zone (EZ),
and fundus autoﬂuorescence (FAF) are apparently normal [ 59,60]. In addition, cAOSLO
of RP patients with preserved central vision showed only 1 out of 14 eyes with a normal
cone mosaic, while 10 eyes had an irregular mosaic with large dark patches, indicating
the disruption of the cone mosaic pattern. Cone density and the percent of the hexagonal
Voronoi domain were signiﬁcantly different from normal eyes. Reduced cone density was
correlated with thinner ONL and photoreceptor layers [ 49,61]. Using the rtx1 camera, a
signiﬁcant decrease in foveal cone density has been reported in two patients with RP [ 61].Diagnostics 2023, 13, 2413 10 of 23
Comparing ﬁndings from OCT, FAF, and AOSLO in a patient with RP , three types of
cone mosaic phenotypes were described: normal cone mosaic in the center of the fovea,
blurred cone mosaic ring in the parafoveal area with rapid deterioration of the cone mosaic
from the inner to the outer edge of the ring, and cone disappearance with visible RPEs.
A dramatic decrease in cone density was observed while the density at the blurred ring
area was impossible to determine [ 62]. Gale and colleagues reported AOFIO ﬁndings in
39 patients with RP using the rtx1 camera and described four stages of cone degenera-
tion [ 63]. At wider eccentricities with a loss in the EZ band and thinned ONL on SDOCT,
hypo-reﬂective blurred cones (stressed/dying cones) were noted on AO imaging. With
increasing eccentricity, a mixture of hypo- and hyper-reﬂective spots with irregular spacing
(photoreceptor cellular debris) was observed along with further thinning of the ONL. In
areas of complete ONL loss, there were sparse hypo-reﬂective spots and no visible cones
(RPE pigmentation) [ 63]. In a proof-of-concept study, Roshandel et al. showed that cone
metrics are more sensitive than EZ span in detecting structural disease progression over 6
months in rod–cone dystrophy (RCD). Cone metrics should be considered as a potential
structural endpoint for measuring disease progression and the efﬁcacy of interventions in
future RP clinical trials [13].
Early structural changes were observed in female carriers of the RPGR mutation using
AO and microperimetry. Point-wise sensitivity at 68 loci located 1to 9away from the
preferred retinal locus and cone density at 12 loci located 1to 3away from the foveal
center were measured and showed severe point-wise sensitivity and cone density defects
in asymptomatic patients with normal visual acuity [ 64]. In a study of 26 individuals with
IRDs, cone density was decreased by up to 62% below normal at or near the fovea in eyes
with normal visual acuity and foveal sensitivity. Despite cone density measurements being
52% below normal, visual acuity and foveal sensitivity were preserved and were negatively
linked with cone spacing. Findings suggest that objective and direct measurements of the
cone structure may be more sensitive predictors of disease severity than VA and foveal
sensitivity [65].
In ﬁve patients with biallelic Crumbs cell polarity complex component 1 (CRB1)-associated
RP , loss of photoreceptors may be an early ﬁnding in asymptomatic patients [ 66], sup-
porting that AO imaging may be more sensitive than conventional techniques, such as
SD-OCT, in detecting subtle structural damage and diagnosing early-stage CRB1-associated
retinopathy. Similarly, Sun et al. found a signiﬁcant reduction in foveal cone density in
patients with Usher syndrome compared with patients with RP in locations with normal EZ
and the interdigitating zone (IZ) before visual acuity changes or OCT disruptions [ 67]. A
cross-sectional study on eight family members with novel Retinol Dehydrogenase 12 (RDH12)
mutation showed reduced cone densities along the temporal meridian. Noticeably, one
family member with a minimal clinical complaint and normal macular structure on SD-OCT
showed a reduction in cone densities at all regions of interest temporal to the fovea on
AOSLO [ 68]. Visual acuity and contrast sensitivity tests can be used to estimate the foveal
cone function in patients with IRDs; however, contrast sensitivity appeared to be more sen-
sitive than visual acuity in assessing the central visual function in patients with RP [69,70].
Strong correlations between visual acuity and cone spacing have been observed [36,71]
Cone spacing was signiﬁcantly increased in IRD patients and was correlated with visual
acuity, foveal sensitivity, and multifocal electroretinogram (mfERG) ﬁndings [ 71,72]. Exam-
ples of the cone mosaic in a healthy eye and patients with different stages of RP are shown
in Figures 6and 7.Diagnostics 2023, 13, 2413 11 of 23
Diagnostics 2023,  13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 24 
 
 of the cone structure may be more sensitive predictors of disease severity than V A and 
foveal sensitivity [65]. 
In ﬁve patients with biallelic Crumbs cell polarity complex component 1 ( CRB1 )-associ-
ated RP, loss of photoreceptors may be an early ﬁnding in asymptomatic patients [66], 
supporting that AO imaging may be more sensitive than conventional techniques, such as 
SD-OCT, in detecting subtle structural damage and diagnosing early-stage CRB1 -associ-
ated retinopathy. Similarly, Sun et al. found a signi ﬁcant reduction in foveal cone density 
in patients with Usher syndrome compared wi th patients with RP in locations with nor-
mal EZ and the interdigitating zone (IZ) before visual acuity changes or OCT disruptions 
[67]. A cross-sectional study on eight family members with novel Retinol Dehydrogenase 12  
(RDH12 ) mutation showed reduced cone densitie s along the temporal meridian. Noticea-
bly, one family member with a minimal clinical complaint and normal macular structure on SD-OCT showed a reduction in cone densities at all regions of interest temporal to the 
fovea on AOSLO [68]. Visual acuity and contrast  sensitivity tests can be used to estimate 
the foveal cone function in patients with IR Ds; however, contrast sensitivity appeared to 
be more sensitive than visual acuity in assessing the central visual function in patients with RP [69,70]. Strong correlations between visual acuity and cone spacing have been 
observed [36,71] Cone spacing was signi ﬁcantly increased in IRD patients and was corre-
lated with visual acuity, foveal sensitivity, and multifocal electroretinogram (mfERG) 
ﬁndings [71,72]. Examples of the cone mosa ic in a healthy eye and patients with di ﬀerent 
stages of RP are shown in Figures 6 and 7. 
 
Figure 6. Cone mosaic changes in RP. Automated detection of cones (red dots) with manual adjust-
ment (green dots) shows normal cone mosaic with an eccentricity-dependent decline in cone density 
and an increase in cone spacing ( top row ) in a healthy subject. Patients  may reveal mild perifoveal 
mosaic alteration (second row ), parafoveal and perifoveal alteration ( third row ), and severe para-
foveal and perifoveal alteration ( bottom row ). T = temporal; RP = retinitis pigmentosa. 
Figure 6. Cone mosaic changes in RP . Automated detection of cones (red dots) with manual ad-
justment (green dots) shows normal cone mosaic with an eccentricity-dependent decline in cone
density and an increase in cone spacing ( top row ) in a healthy subject. Patients may reveal mild
perifoveal mosaic alteration ( second row ), parafoveal and perifoveal alteration ( third row ), and
severe parafoveal and perifoveal alteration (bottom row). T = temporal; RP = retinitis pigmentosa.
Diagnostics 2023,  13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 24 
 
  
Figure 7. Cone density map in a 28 y/o healthy control ( A) and diﬀerent stages of RP ( B–E). Note 
the increased cone visibility at the fovea in patients with RP  (most prominent in B), a phenomenon 
that has been reported in these patients. 
4.2. Cone-Dominated Diseases 
In the se tting of mild disease in two adolescent  relatives with autosomal dominant 
cone rod dystrophy with Guanylate Cyclase Activator 1 ( GUCA1A ) mutation, AOSLO re-
vealed cones with diminished re ﬂectance relative to surrounding rods (described as “dark 
cones”) possibly due to the absence of or shorter outer segments [73,74]. In a cone–rod 
dystrophy (CRD) patient, AOFIO and AOSLO revealed large areas devoid of wave-guid-
ing cones within the atrophic regions and abno rmally large cones in a clinically spared 
location which were correlated with mfERG peak amplitudes [36]. In a non-syndromic 
biallelic POC1 centriolar protein homolog B  (POC1B)  mutation in a young male, a non-spe-
ciﬁc altered cone mosaic pa ttern with sparsely distributed cones around the central fovea 
was observed by AOFIO. Authors suggest that  the disruption of the photoreceptor outer 
segments with preservation of the inner segm ents may be a feature of CD or CRD related 
to POC1B  mutations, prompting evaluation with SD-AOSLO in CD patients [75]. In other 
studies, individuals with CRD showed increa sed cone space and decreased cone density 
[71,76,77]. Findings of AO in patients with  enhanced S-cone syndrome include higher 
cone density at temporal parafovea with lowe r total photoreceptor densities, diminished 
outer segment cone receptors wave-guide signals, disrupted cone arrangement, larger 
cone cells with dark patchy-like lesions in the macula [78,79]. In some cases, AO imaging can be very helpful to distinguish speci ﬁc photoreceptor diseases with closely shared fea-
tures and almost the same clinical ﬁndings on standard evaluations. Moore et el. high-
lighted this bene ﬁcial role of AOSLO in di ﬀerentiating RGS9 /R9AP -associated retinal dys-
function (bradyopsia) (showing preserved integr ity of cone mosaic at the fovea) with oli-
gocone trichromacy (showing sparse cone mosa ic at the fovea), both of which are similar 
in clinical and standard ERG ﬁndings [80]. 
4.3. Macular Dystrophies 
4.3.1. Stargardt Disease 
AOSLO has elucidated early changes in Stargardt disease (STGD) which begin in 
photoreceptor outer segments spreading later to  RPE cells even in locations with normal-
appearing OCT and fundus auto ﬂuorescence [81,82]. The earliest cone spacing abnormal-
ity was observed in regions of homogeneous FA F, normal outer retinal structure with nor-
mal visual function. Closer to the fovea, co ne spacing was increased with focal increased 
FAF near the central region of atrophy. AOSLO re ﬂectivity did not correlate with the 
quantity of lipofuscin accumulation in RPE cells. In regions of complete macular atrophy, 
AOSLO showed bright oversaturated areas where cones were not seen, consistent with 
SD-OCT scans revealing extensive loss in the outer retinal layers [2]. In AOSLO imaging 
of a female with STGD, there was a lack of cone mosaic with visible RPE cells in the atrophic zone, blurred cone mosaic, and reduced visibility of photoreceptors with some 
areas of the starry-night cone pa ttern in increased FAF peri-atrophic areas and normal 
cone mosaic in normal FAF peri-atrophic area  along with decreased cone density from the 
center to peripheral retina [62]. In a study on 14 cases of clinically diagnosed STGD, Raz-
een et al. suggested that compared to ONL, EZ, or IZ integrity assessment in OCT cone 
density measures by AO had a stronger co rrelation with retinal functional. They 
Figure 7. Cone density map in a 28 y/o healthy control ( A) and different stages of RP ( B–E). Note the
increased cone visibility at the fovea in patients with RP (most prominent in B), a phenomenon that
has been reported in these patients.
4.2. Cone-Dominated Diseases
In the setting of mild disease in two adolescent relatives with autosomal dominant cone
rod dystrophy with Guanylate Cyclase Activator 1 (GUCA1A) mutation, AOSLO revealed
cones with diminished reﬂectance relative to surrounding rods (described as “dark cones”)
possibly due to the absence of or shorter outer segments [ 73,74]. In a cone–rod dystrophy
(CRD) patient, AOFIO and AOSLO revealed large areas devoid of wave-guiding cones
within the atrophic regions and abnormally large cones in a clinically spared location which
were correlated with mfERG peak amplitudes [ 36]. In a non-syndromic biallelic POC1
centriolar protein homolog B (POC1B) mutation in a young male, a non-speciﬁc altered cone
mosaic pattern with sparsely distributed cones around the central fovea was observed by
AOFIO. Authors suggest that the disruption of the photoreceptor outer segments with
preservation of the inner segments may be a feature of CD or CRD related to POC1B
mutations, prompting evaluation with SD-AOSLO in CD patients [ 75]. In other studies,
individuals with CRD showed increased cone space and decreased cone density [ 71,76,77].
Findings of AO in patients with enhanced S-cone syndrome include higher cone density atDiagnostics 2023, 13, 2413 12 of 23
temporal parafovea with lower total photoreceptor densities, diminished outer segment
cone receptors wave-guide signals, disrupted cone arrangement, larger cone cells with
dark patchy-like lesions in the macula [ 78,79]. In some cases, AO imaging can be very
helpful to distinguish speciﬁc photoreceptor diseases with closely shared features and
almost the same clinical ﬁndings on standard evaluations. Moore et el. highlighted this
beneﬁcial role of AOSLO in differentiating RGS9/R9AP-associated retinal dysfunction
(bradyopsia) (showing preserved integrity of cone mosaic at the fovea) with oligocone
trichromacy (showing sparse cone mosaic at the fovea), both of which are similar in clinical
and standard ERG ﬁndings [80].
4.3. Macular Dystrophies
4.3.1. Stargardt Disease
AOSLO has elucidated early changes in Stargardt disease (STGD) which begin in
photoreceptor outer segments spreading later to RPE cells even in locations with normal-
appearing OCT and fundus autoﬂuorescence [ 81,82]. The earliest cone spacing abnormality
was observed in regions of homogeneous FAF, normal outer retinal structure with normal
visual function. Closer to the fovea, cone spacing was increased with focal increased FAF
near the central region of atrophy. AOSLO reﬂectivity did not correlate with the quantity
of lipofuscin accumulation in RPE cells. In regions of complete macular atrophy, AOSLO
showed bright oversaturated areas where cones were not seen, consistent with SD-OCT
scans revealing extensive loss in the outer retinal layers [ 2]. In AOSLO imaging of a female
with STGD, there was a lack of cone mosaic with visible RPE cells in the atrophic zone,
blurred cone mosaic, and reduced visibility of photoreceptors with some areas of the starry-
night cone pattern in increased FAF peri-atrophic areas and normal cone mosaic in normal
FAF peri-atrophic area along with decreased cone density from the center to peripheral
retina [ 62]. In a study on 14 cases of clinically diagnosed STGD, Razeen et al. suggested that
compared to ONL, EZ, or IZ integrity assessment in OCT cone density measures by AO
had a stronger correlation with retinal functional. They hypothesized that the signiﬁcant
cone loss in areas of intact EZ was attributed to the presence of abnormally enlarged rod
photoreceptors [83].
4.3.2. Vitelliform Macular Dystrophies (VMDs)
As shown by cAOSLO and SD-AOSLO imaging, cone photoreceptor inner segments
are enlarged, and cone density is reduced within clinically apparent lesions. In contrast,
both density and appearance of cone inner segments return to normal immediately adjacent
to the vitelliform lesion. Split-detector imaging also revealed mobile disk-like structures,
which may represent reactive subretinal cells [ 84]. Likewise, using multimodal AO within
macular vitelliform lesions, both cone and RPE densities were reduced below normal.
Outside of lesions, cone and RPE densities were slightly reduced but with a high degree
of variability across the four genes BEST1, PRPH2, IMPG1, and IMPG2 [85]. The degree
of cone mosaic disruption in Best vitelliform macular dystrophy, although present in all
stages, varied by the stage of the disease and was often patchy with areas of signiﬁcant
photoreceptor disruption surrounded by areas of a contiguous photoreceptor mosaic, even
in a patient with advanced atrophy and ﬁbrosis [86].
4.3.3. X-Linked Retinoschisis (XLRS)
Using a multimodal AO retinal camera (MAORI, Physical Sciences, Inc., Andover, MA),
offset aperture imaging showed “hill and valley” topography resembling the “spoke-wheel”
pattern typically seen in XLRS. Signiﬁcantly larger cones and increased cone diameter with
greater eccentricity compared to healthy subjects were observed [ 87]. The authors suggest
the larger cone diameters are due to trapped retinoschisin in the inner segment of the
receptors. Duncan et al. explained the larger cones resulted from abnormal development
of the fovea and chronic disruption due to intraretinal ﬂuid accumulation. These authors
argue that if the retinoschisin accumulation was the cause, the pathologic lesions wouldDiagnostics 2023, 13, 2413 13 of 23
not be limited to the fovea region but extend to the whole retina [ 88]. Retinal AO-OCT
images show mottling, a possible sign of abnormalities in the ﬁrst synapse consistent with
OPL dysfunction. Notably, even in clinically normal regions of the retina where the outer
plexiform layer (OPL) seemed normal, AO-OCT indicated severe abnormalities at the
OPL [ 87]. The width of the spoke-wheel retinal folds in the AO image was thinner than
that in the fundus photographs [ 89]. Duncan et al. suggested that although cone density is
reduced, the preservation of waveguiding cones at the fovea and eccentric macular regions
has prognostic and therapeutic implications for XLRS patients [88].
4.4. Choroideremia
AOSLO imaging showed cone mosaic remains intact up to the border of retinal atrophy,
which was abnormally heterogeneous in morphology, diameter, and density sharply at the
border [ 90,91], as well as sharp functional transitions between healthy and degenerated
retina found by AO microperimetry [ 92]. Subclinical widespread large RPEs with increased
inter-center distance between the cells were observed. The presence of patches of intact
cone photoreceptors on AO-enhanced indocyanine green (AOICG) indicate the disruption
of the RPE blood–retinal barrier function [ 93]. Correlation between cone spacing and
choriocapillaris ﬂow voids, and negative correlation with retinal sensitivity, may suggest
cone degeneration accompanied by reduced choriocapillaris perfusion [ 94]. Other distinct
features of choroideremia were lower image contrast, less well-deﬁned cone edges, and
groups of cones with high reﬂectance relative to the surrounding cone mosaic, compared
to healthy eyes [ 90]. Bubble-like lesions as ﬁrst described by Morgan et al. appeared as
hyper-reﬂective spots with dark edges, which co-locate with hypo-reﬂective spots in the
choroid in OCT [ 90,91]. Large, sparse, and remnant cone inner segments within outer
retinal tubulations and the continuity of the ORTs with the preserved retina may suggest
an intermediate stage of retinal degeneration in choroideremia [ 91]. Recent advancements
in multimodal visualization of human RPEs are promising for CHM gene therapies [ 95–97].
Table 2summarizes the ﬁndings of AO in IRDs.
Table 2. Summary of AO imaging ﬁndings in IRDs.
IRD TypeAO
TechnologyFindings of AO Imaging
Retinitis pigmentosaAOSLO,
AOFIOSigniﬁcant cone loss in the central retina despite intact ONL,
EZ, and normal FAF, irregular cone mosaic, lower cone density,
decreases the percent of hexagonality, hypo-reﬂective blurred
cones in eccentricities, increased cone spacing, visible RPE, and
no detectable cone mosaic in areas of complete INL loss
RPGR Female carrier AOFIOIrregular cone mosaic and decreased cone density in
asymptomatic patients with normal visual acuity
CRB1 AOFIO Decreased cone density despite normal visual acuity and OCT
RDH12 AOSLO Reduced cone density along the temporal meridian
GUCA1A AOSLOTruncated cone in outer segments, reduced cone reﬂectance
(dark cones)
POC1B AOFIODisruption of photoreceptor in outer segments with
preservation of the inner segments blurred EZ and signiﬁcant
cone mosaic disruption around the fovea
NR2E3 (Enhanced
S-cone syndrome)AOSLOHigher cone density at temporal parafovea with lower total
photoreceptor densities, diminished outer segment wave-guide
signals, disrupted cone arrangement, larger cone cells with
dark patchy-like lesions in the macula
RGS9/R9AP (bradyopsia) AOSLOReserved integrity of cone mosaic and cone density within the
normal range. A small area of central hypo-reﬂective lesion of
non-waveguiding cones with minimal decrease in peak cone
density reported in a patientDiagnostics 2023, 13, 2413 14 of 23
Table 2. Cont.
IRD TypeAO
TechnologyFindings of AO Imaging
ABCA4 (Stargardt
disease)AOSLODisrupted cone mosaic, decreased cone density from central to
peripheral retina, increased cone spacing in regions with
normal OCT and FAF, starry-night cone pattern and increased
cone spacing in areas of increased FAF, lack of cone mosaic
with visible RPE cells in the atrophic zone, signiﬁcant cone loss
and abnormally enlarged rod photoreceptors despite intact EZ,
no correlation between the quantity of lipofuscin accumulation
in RPE cells and reﬂectivity shown in AOSLO
VMD AOSLOReduced cone and RPE density and enlarged inner segments
within the vitelliform lesion, reactive subretinal cells shown as
mobile disk-like structures, patchy areas of signiﬁcant
photoreceptor disruption surrounded by contiguous
photoreceptor mosaic
RS1 (XLRS)AOSLO,
AO-OCTSpoke-wheel appearance in offset aperture imaging, increased
cone diameter, decreased cone density, severe abnormalities at
the OPL in AO-OCT of clinically normal regions, no detectable
cone mosaic in areas of EZ and IZ loss
CHM (Choroideremia)AOSLO,
AOICG,
AO-OCTIntact cone mosaic up to the border of retinal atrophy,
ill-deﬁned cone edges, groups of cones with high reﬂectance
relative to the surrounding cone mosaic, bubble-like
hyper-reﬂective spots with dark edges, large remnants of cone
inner segments within outer retinal tubulations, widespread
large RPEs, choriocapillaris ﬂow voids in areas of increased
cone spacing, disruption of RPE blood barrier in AOICG
AO: adaptive optics, AOFIO: adaptive optics ﬂood illumination ophthalmoscopy, AO-OCT: adaptive optics
coherence tomography, AOICG: AO-enhanced indocyanine green, AOSLO: adaptive optics scanning laser oph-
thalmoscopy, EZ: ellipsoid zone, FAF: fundus autoﬂuorescence, ICG: indocyanine green, INL: internuclear layer,
IZ: interdigitation zone, mfERG: multifocal electroretinogram, OCT: optical coherence tomography, OPL: outer
plexiform layer, ONL: outer nuclear layer, RPE: retinal pigment epithelium; VMD = vitelliform macular dystrophy;
XLRS = X-linked retinoschisis.
5. AO imaging in Tracking the Progression of IRDs
A longitudinal study on three patients with IRDs (two RP and one Usher) showed a
signiﬁcant decline in cone density (9.1% per year) in sham-treated eyes compared to eyes
treated with the ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF). Similar changes were observed in OCT
but not visual acuity, visual ﬁeld, and ERG [ 3]. Cone metrics along with microperimetry
were useful for assessing structure–function correlations in normal subjects and carriers of
X-linked RP , at a cellular level [ 98]. In a study on RP1-associated autosomal recessive RP
patients, Ueno et al. reported that despite the lack of cone mosaic visibility, homogenous
residual islands of photoreceptors, in accordance with hyper-autoﬂuorescent areas in FAF,
were seen in AO fundus images with small hypo-reﬂective clumps at the edges. The size
and homogeneity of these areas were diminished in follow-up images over 4 years [ 99]. In
a2.5-year follow-up of two patients with Best vitelliform macular dystrophy in regions
directly around lesions, photoreceptor density was normal and steady [ 84]. In a longitudi-
nal study over 21 to 29 months on 3 cases of RPE65-associated Leber congenital amaurosis
(LCA), Kalitzeos et al. found that while there were no visualized changes in confocal
AOSLO, non-confocal split-detection showed inner segment enlargement along with a re-
duction in foveal cone density over time [ 100]. In AOSLO imaging of an STGD patient taken
over 1 year, enlarging outer retinal tabulations—a suggestive sign for a more advanced
stage of the disease—were seen as ﬁnger-like projections with central teardrop structures
in split-detection but not confocal AO imaging. As the length of tubulation increased, the
central teardrop-like structures, which were assumed to constitute migratory RPE cells,
seemed to reduce in size, in line with morphologic changes in spindle-shaped RPE cells
in later stages of degenerative changes [ 83]. AO has also been used for tracking ultra-rare
IRDs, such as RCBTB1-associated retinopathy showing progressive irregularity or complete
loss of cone mosaic in areas of RPE and outer retinal atrophy [ 101]. In a study on patients
with resolved central serous chorioretinopathy, cone density was remarkably decreasedDiagnostics 2023, 13, 2413 15 of 23
compared to normal eyes, but it signiﬁcantly increased 12 months after resolution [ 102]. In
another study, authors reported the regeneration of cone cells 12 months after successful
retinal detachment repair (scleral buckling) using a rtx1 AO camera [103].
6. Limitations
6.1. Resolution
As previously mentioned, due to the relatively lower transverse resolution of AOFIO
compared with AOSLO, small cones of central 2and rods are not reliably detectable by
this technology (Figure 8B). Such a low axial resolution can decrease image contrast as
well as the repeatability of cone density measurements in longitudinal assessments [ 104].
Although AOSLO cameras can resolve rods and foveal cones in a very small area of the
retina, the lengthy process of multiple frame acquisition in the macular region and the
extensive montage required make this technology less practical in the clinical setting. It
is also notable that regardless of image quality most rods and some foveal cones cannot
be visualized in SD-AOSLO due to contrast issues affecting image resolution and the
photoreceptor refractive index proﬁle [ 23]. Speckled noise in OCT imaging can also lead to
a diminished resolution in AO-OCT, most of which can be improved using a variety of post-
processing methods of image deblurring or more recent deep learning-based methods [ 105].
Diagnostics 2023,  13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 24 
 
  
Figure 8. Examples of AOFIO. Normal cone mosa ic detectable in the entire imaging ﬁ eld in a normal 
healthy retina ( A). Foveal cones are undetectable within the central 1–2° ( B). Image quality might 
be aﬀected by visually signi ﬁcant cataract ( C,D), cystoid macular oedema ( E), or high astigmatism 
(F). 
6.2. Image Quality 
AO Image quality is a ﬀected by a variety of instrument -related factors, including ac-
quisition speed and coherence properties of the illumination source as well as the patient’s 
ocular conditions, including refractive errors, corneal scars, cataract or prior intraocular 
lens implantation, rapid eye movements, age- related miosis, the severity of retinal dis-
eases, and the presence of coexisting retinal abnormalities (Figure 8C–F). Moreover, it has 
been revealed that image quality decreases with an increasing retinal eccentricity [106]. 
By contrast, many imaged cones may not be sharp enough to be easily detectable because 
of their altered directionality and diminished waveguiding properties despite intact struc-
tures [107]. Distortions and artifacts caused by  eye motions are more problematic in higher 
magni ﬁcations and en face  planes. Though some of these distortions are correctable in 
post-imaging processing, instruments with higher acquisition speeds that are less vulner-
able to motion artifacts are preferred. Recently introduced AO-OCTs with 1 MHz A-scan 
have this quali ﬁcation, but sacri ﬁcing image sensitivity at such a high speed makes a dif-
ferent challenge, especially for the visualizat ion of inner retinal layers. So, the variety of 
IRD patients who can e ﬀectively be imaged by AO is limited, especially in the presence of 
concomitant ocular pathologies. Backsca ttering of light from cellular debris or other outer 
retinal cells, such as RPEs, increases the signal-to-noise ratio and reduces the image qual-
ity of a diseased area in these patients. To highlight the signi ﬁcance of limitations caused 
by poor AO image quality, it is worth noting that in numerous research studies on retinal 
diseases or even normal healthy retina, almost half of the taken AO images are reported 
to be excluded due to image quality issues [104,108,109]. Grading image quality and dif-
ferentiation of low-quality images due to op tical reasons from path ology-related mosaic 
disruption is a major challeng e based on our observations [106]. Although an experienced 
observer can di ﬀerentiate these two entities in most instances, mild optical distortions 
may not be detected and can be a ttributed to retinal pathology [13]. Hence, cautious inter-
pretation of cone metrics should be considered in the presence of mild optical barriers, 
Figure 8. Examples of AOFIO. Normal cone mosaic detectable in the entire imaging ﬁeld in a normal
healthy retina ( A). Foveal cones are undetectable within the central 1–2(B). Image quality might be
affected by visually signiﬁcant cataract (C,D), cystoid macular oedema (E), or high astigmatism (F).
6.2. Image Quality
AO Image quality is affected by a variety of instrument-related factors, including ac-
quisition speed and coherence properties of the illumination source as well as the patient’s
ocular conditions, including refractive errors, corneal scars, cataract or prior intraocular
lens implantation, rapid eye movements, age-related miosis, the severity of retinal diseases,
and the presence of coexisting retinal abnormalities (Figure 8C–F). Moreover, it has been
revealed that image quality decreases with an increasing retinal eccentricity [ 106]. By
contrast, many imaged cones may not be sharp enough to be easily detectable because of
their altered directionality and diminished waveguiding properties despite intact struc-Diagnostics 2023, 13, 2413 16 of 23
tures [ 107]. Distortions and artifacts caused by eye motions are more problematic in higher
magniﬁcations and en face planes. Though some of these distortions are correctable in post-
imaging processing, instruments with higher acquisition speeds that are less vulnerable to
motion artifacts are preferred. Recently introduced AO-OCTs with 1 MHz A-scan have this
qualiﬁcation, but sacriﬁcing image sensitivity at such a high speed makes a different chal-
lenge, especially for the visualization of inner retinal layers. So, the variety of IRD patients
who can effectively be imaged by AO is limited, especially in the presence of concomitant
ocular pathologies. Backscattering of light from cellular debris or other outer retinal cells,
such as RPEs, increases the signal-to-noise ratio and reduces the image quality of a diseased
area in these patients. To highlight the signiﬁcance of limitations caused by poor AO image
quality, it is worth noting that in numerous research studies on retinal diseases or even
normal healthy retina, almost half of the taken AO images are reported to be excluded
due to image quality issues [ 104,108,109]. Grading image quality and differentiation of
low-quality images due to optical reasons from pathology-related mosaic disruption is
a major challenge based on our observations [ 106]. Although an experienced observer
can differentiate these two entities in most instances, mild optical distortions may not be
detected and can be attributed to retinal pathology [ 13]. Hence, cautious interpretation of
cone metrics should be considered in the presence of mild optical barriers, such as cataract,
astigmatism, or inner retinal pathologies, which do not contraindicate with taking images
of fairly good quality but might affect the results.
6.3. Localization
Accurate localization of the region of interest (ROI) is critical in retinal image analysis.
Enhanced magniﬁcation of AO imaging results in a very small ﬁeld of view, which creates
a challenge for the precise localization of the ROI. Since the AO ﬁxation point may not
coincide with other retinal center landmarks that are more reliable, relying on the distance
from the AO ﬁxation point may cause errors in ROI localization. Our recent study showed
a signiﬁcant shift in the AO montage center in relation to the preferred retinal locus and
foveal pit center, which could result in cone mosaic measurement errors [ 110]. Retinal
vasculature is the most used landmark for aligning the AO montage with standard en face
retinal images, such as near-infrared reﬂectance (IR) or fundus autoﬂuorescence images.
The IR + OCT module can be very useful in precise localization of the foveal pit center,
which then can be marked on the IR image and used as a reference for AO alignment.
Location of the preferred retinal locus can be determined by aligning the AO montage with
the SLO image provided by microperimeters, such as MAIA; although, the SLO images
might be distorted, thus preventing accurate alignment [110].
Other authors have attempted to overcome this limitation by conjugating a wide-ﬁeld
line-scanning ophthalmoscope and a closed-loop optical retinal tracker with AOSLO [ 111].
By further efforts toward implementing stabilization systems with digital registration [ 112]
in optical eye tracking and hybrid tracking, AOSLO has provided real-time stabilization
with the ability to correct high-amplitude low-frequency drifts of the eye in a wider ﬁeld
of view [ 113]. The importance of accurate localization and sequential image alignment
is highlighted in follow-up visits and longitudinal assessments for patient tracking. Us-
ing modules with registration strategies, such as OCTs with intensity-based volumetric
registration, spherical mapping of the surface, fovea alignment, or even point-to-point
correspondence by in-exact matching of surface currents and landmarks on en face OCT,
can be very helpful in this regard [114,115].
6.4. Structure–Function Correlation
To take full advantage of the AO imaging technology in the diagnosis and monitoring
of IRDs, one has to consider incorporation and correlation of functional mapping with a
photoreceptor mosaic. Prior studies have conﬁrmed the strong structure–function corre-
lation of photoreceptors in retinal diseases and speciﬁc IRDs [ 116,117] while others have
shown dissociation of function and structure at the fovea in healthy retinae [ 98] and retinalDiagnostics 2023, 13, 2413 17 of 23
pathologies [ 66,118,119]. Correlating photoreceptor mosaic properties with localized retinal
function might be hindered by challenges in accurate co-localization of the ROIs used for
the two measurements [ 64,110] and a lack of consistent relationship between photoreceptor
measurements and retinal sensitivity across the macula [ 98]. The latter might be explained
by the fact that in normal retina, the retinal light sensitivity is determined by the size of
the receptive ﬁeld of the retinal ganglion cells rather than the density or spacing of the
photoreceptors [ 120]. However, a relationship between retinal sensitivity loss and photore-
ceptor degeneration has been reported in different retinal pathologies [ 116,117,121]. AO
microperimetry (AOMP) is a new technology that incorporates AOSLO and microperimetry
to map photoreceptor mosaic and retinal sensitivity simultaneously. AOMP can be very
useful in the assessment of structure–function correlation at a cellular level in healthy and
diseased retinae [92,122–124].
6.5. Cone Matching and Follow-Up Imaging
Short-term and long-term variations in cone reﬂectivity and dysﬂective cones have
been noted in normal subjects with no known ocular disease [ 125,126]. It has been proposed
that the changes in the reﬂectivity of cones are either the result of altered molecular and
biological processes, such as phototransduction, or changes in outer segment length, which
acts as a biological interferometer [ 127,128]. In addition, ﬁndings of our prior research
have shown that overlapping images that cover the region of interest but were taken with
different ﬁxation coordinates may vary signiﬁcantly in terms of image quality and cone
metrics [ 13]. Although current technology enables follow-up examinations on the same
ROI, the accuracy of automated ROI detection might be affected by a shift in the ﬁxation
point and/or change in retinal vascular pattern due to pathology. Hence, we recommend
alignment of the AO montage with en face retinal scan to localize the ROI precisely.
6.6. Special Considerations in Patients with RP
Photoreceptor mosaic parameters are gaining popularity as structural endpoints in RP
clinical trials, though improvements in imaging and image analysis protocols are required.
The most important challenge facing the use of AO imaging in patients with RP is the
frequent ocular co-morbidities, such as cataract (or history of cataract surgery), macular
edema, high refractive errors, outer retinal atrophy, and epiretinal membrane and ﬁxation
instability that reduce the image quality and affect mosaic visualization (Figure 8C–F).
Feasibility of AO imaging may vary with the properties of the patient cohort. For example,
we reported that 80% of patients met one or more exclusion criteria and were not eligible
for AO imaging [ 13]. However, other studies reported higher feasibility rates [ 63]. In
addition, the development of new or the progression of an existing lens opacity or cystoid
macular edema during the follow-up period are likely, which can reduce image quality
and alter mosaic properties artifactually. The differentiation of actual photoreceptor mosaic
changes due to disease progression from diminished image quality can be very challenging
in these cases.
7. Conclusions
Overall, AO imaging remains a viable and potentially useful tool for early diagnosis
and monitoring disease progression in IRDs. Using cone metrics as structural endpoints
may help with an earlier detection of the efﬁcacy of neuroprotective interventions in
halting disease progression. More interestingly, AO imaging was useful in detecting
disease progression in patients with RP and no obvious outer retinal defect on SD-OCT.
Considering that in a group of IRDs, including RP , clinically signiﬁcant visual loss tends to
occur after foveal involvement, the early ﬁndings of AO in the foveal region can provide an
early signal for the safety and efﬁcacy of interventions for IRDs. Upon further validation,
AO imaging has the potential to revolutionize structural outcome measures used in future
clinical trials on RP and other IRDs. Lack of standard image acquisition and analysis
protocols is one of the main issues that should be addressed in future studies using AODiagnostics 2023, 13, 2413 18 of 23
retinal cameras. While imaging of the temporal retina along the horizontal meridian may
be a good option for monitoring disease progression in RP , central images can be more
useful in detecting parafoveal photoreceptor mosaic changes at early stages of macular
disorders or generalized retinopathies.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, D.R. and F.K.C.; methodology, H.A., M.F. and K.H.;
writing—original draft preparation, H.A., M.F., K.H., A.M. and S.J.; writing—review and editing,
K.H., D.R. and F.K.C.; supervision, D.R. and F.K.C.; funding acquisition, F.K.C. All authors have read
and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded in whole or part by the National Health and Medical Research
Council [GNT1116360; GNT1188694; GNT1054712; and MRF1142962]. For the purposes of open ac-
cess, the author has applied for a CC BY public copyright license to any Author Accepted Manuscript
version arising from this submission.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Liang, J.; Williams, D.R.; Miller, D.T. Supernormal vision and high-resolution retinal imaging through adaptive optics. J. Opt. Soc.
Am. A Opt. Image Sci. Vis. 1997, 14, 2884–2892. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Chen, Y.; Roorda, A.; Duncan, J.L. Advances in imaging of Stargardt disease. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 2010 ,664, 333–340. [CrossRef]
3. Talcott, K.E.; Ratnam, K.; Sundquist, S.M.; Lucero, A.S.; Lujan, B.J.; Tao, W.; Porco, T.C.; Roorda, A.; Duncan, J.L. Longitudinal
study of cone photoreceptors during retinal degeneration and in response to ciliary neurotrophic factor treatment. Investig.
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2011, 52, 2219–2226. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Hillard, J.G.; Gast, T.J.; Chui, T.Y.; Sapir, D.; Burns, S.A. Retinal arterioles in hypo-, normo-, and hypertensive subjects measured
using adaptive optics. Transl. Vis. Sci. Technol. 2016, 5, 16. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Luo, T.; Gast, T.J.; Vermeer, T.J.; Burns, S.A. Retinal vascular branching in healthy and diabetic subjects. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis.
Sci.2017, 58, 2685–2694. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Tam, J.; Dhamdhere, K.P .; Tiruveedhula, P .; Manzanera, S.; Barez, S.; Bearse, M.A.; Adams, A.J.; Roorda, A. Disruption of the
retinal parafoveal capillary network in type 2 diabetes before the onset of diabetic retinopathy. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2011 ,
52, 9257–9266. [CrossRef]
7. Kurokawa, K.; Liu, Z.; Miller, D.T. Adaptive optics optical coherence tomography angiography for morphometric analysis of
choriocapillaris. Biomed. Opt. Express 2017, 8, 1803–1822. [CrossRef]
8. Heath Jeffery, R.C.; Mukhtar, S.A.; McAllister, I.L.; Morgan, W.H.; Mackey, D.A.; Chen, F.K. Inherited retinal diseases are the most
common cause of blindness in the working-age population in Australia. Ophthalmic Genet. 2021, 42, 431–439. [CrossRef]
9. Newton, F.; Megaw, R. Mechanisms of Photoreceptor Death in Retinitis Pigmentosa. Genes 2020, 11, 1120. [CrossRef]
10. Ciulla, T.A.; Hussain, R.M.; Berrocal, A.M.; Nagiel, A. Voretigene neparvovec-rzyl for treatment of RPE65-mediated inherited
retinal diseases: A model for ocular gene therapy development. Expert Opin. Biol. Ther. 2020, 20, 565–578. [CrossRef]
11. Cehajic-Kapetanovic, J.; Xue, K.; Martinez-Fernandez de la Camara, C.; Nanda, A.; Davies, A.; Wood, L.J.; Salvetti, A.P .; Fischer,
M.D.; Aylward, J.W.; Barnard, A.R.; et al. Initial results from a ﬁrst-in-human gene therapy trial on X-linked retinitis pigmentosa
caused by mutations in RPGR. Nat. Med. 2020, 26, 354–359. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Liu, X.; Lillywhite, J.; Zhu, W.; Huang, Z.; Clark, A.M.; Gosstola, N.; Maguire, C.T.; Dykxhoorn, D.; Chen, Z.Y.; Yang, J. Generation
and Genetic Correction of USH2A c.2299delG Mutation in Patient-Derived Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells. Genes 2021 ,12, 805.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Roshandel, D.; Heath Jeffery, R.C.; Charng, J.; Sampson, D.M.; McLenachan, S.; Mackey, D.A.; Chen, F.K. Short-Term Parafoveal
Cone Loss Despite Preserved Ellipsoid Zone in Rod Cone Dystrophy. Transl. Vis. Sci. Technol. 2021 ,10, 11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Babcock, H.W. The Possibility of Compensating Astronomical Seeing. Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 1953, 65, 8. [CrossRef]
15. Liu, L.; Wu, Z.; Qi, M.; Li, Y.; Zhang, M.; Liao, D.; Gao, P . Application of Adaptive Optics in Ophthalmology. Photonics 2022 ,9,
288. [CrossRef]
16. Hofer, H.; Sredar, N.; Queener, H.; Li, C.; Porter, J. Wavefront sensorless adaptive optics ophthalmoscopy in the human eye. Opt.
Express 2011, 19, 14160–14171. [CrossRef]
17. Tumahai, P .; Moureaux, C.; Meillat, M.; Debellemaniere, G.; Flores, M.; Delbosc, B.; Saleh, M. High-resolution imaging of
photoreceptors in healthy human eyes using an adaptive optics retinal camera. Eye2018, 32, 1723–1730. [CrossRef]
18. Salmon, A.E.; Cooper, R.F.; Langlo, C.S.; Baghaie, A.; Dubra, A.; Carroll, J. An automated reference frame selection (ARFS)
algorithm for cone imaging with adaptive optics scanning light ophthalmoscopy. Transl. Vis. Sci. Technol. 2017, 6, 9. [CrossRef]Diagnostics 2023, 13, 2413 19 of 23
19. Bidaut Garnier, M.; Flores, M.; Debellemanière, G.; Puyraveau, M.; Tumahai, P .; Meillat, M.; Schwartz, C.; Montard, M.; Delbosc,
B.; Saleh, M. Reliability of cone counts using an adaptive optics retinal camera. Clin. Exp. Ophthalmol. 2014 ,42, 833–840. [CrossRef]
20. Lombardo, M.; Lombardo, G.; Ducoli, P .; Serrao, S. Adaptive optics photoreceptor imaging. Ophthalmology 2012 ,119, 1498–1498.e2.
[CrossRef]
21. Muthiah, M.N.; Gias, C.; Chen, F.K.; Zhong, J.; McClelland, Z.; Sallo, F.B.; Peto, T.; Coffey, P .J.; da Cruz, L. Cone photoreceptor
deﬁnition on adaptive optics retinal imaging. Br. J. Ophthalmol. 2014, 98, 1073–1079. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Zhang, B.; Li, N.; Kang, J.; He, Y.; Chen, X.-M. Adaptive optics scanning laser ophthalmoscopy in fundus imaging, a review and
update. Int. J. Ophthalmol. 2017, 10, 1751. [PubMed]
23. Scoles, D.; Sulai, Y.N.; Langlo, C.S.; Fishman, G.A.; Curcio, C.A.; Carroll, J.; Dubra, A. In vivo imaging of human cone photorecep-
tor inner segments. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2014, 55, 4244–4251. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Fernandez, E.; Drexler, W. Inﬂuence of ocular chromatic aberration and pupil size on transverse resolution in ophthalmic adaptive
optics optical coherence tomography. Opt. Express 2005, 13, 8184–8197. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Reumueller, A.; Wassermann, L.; Salas, M.; Schranz, M.; Hacker, V .; Mylonas, G.; Sacu, S.; Drexler, W.; Pircher, M.; Schmidt-Erfurth,
U.; et al. Three-dimensional composition of the photoreceptor cone layers in healthy eyes using adaptive-optics optical coherence
tomography (AO-OCT). PLoS ONE 2021, 16, e0245293. [CrossRef]
26. Zhang, Y.; Rha, J.; Jonnal, R.; Miller, D. Adaptive optics parallel spectral domain optical coherence tomography for imaging the
living retina. Opt. Express 2005, 13, 4792–4811. [CrossRef]
27. Cense, B.; Gao, W.; Brown, J.M.; Jones, S.M.; Jonnal, R.S.; Mujat, M.; Park, B.H.; de Boer, J.F.; Miller, D.T. Retinal imaging with
polarization-sensitive optical coherence tomography and adaptive optics. Opt. Express 2009, 17, 21634–21651. [CrossRef]
28. Torti, C.; Povazay, B.; Hofer, B.; Unterhuber, A.; Carroll, J.; Ahnelt, P .K.; Drexler, W. Adaptive optics optical coherence tomography
at 120,000 depth scans/s for non-invasive cellular phenotyping of the living human retina. Opt. Express 2009 ,17, 19382–19400.
[CrossRef]
29. Wong, K.S.; Jian, Y.; Cua, M.; Bonora, S.; Zawadzki, R.J.; Sarunic, M.V . In vivo imaging of human photoreceptor mosaic with
wavefront sensorless adaptive optics optical coherence tomography. Biomed. Opt. Express 2015, 6, 580–590. [CrossRef]
30. Davidson, B.; Kalitzeos, A.; Carroll, J.; Dubra, A.; Ourselin, S.; Michaelides, M.; Bergeles, C. Fast adaptive optics scanning light
ophthalmoscope retinal montaging. Biomed. Opt. Express 2018, 9, 4317–4328. [CrossRef]
31. Lowe, D.G. Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints. Int. J. Comput. Vis. 2004, 60, 91–110. [CrossRef]
32. Martin, J.A.; Roorda, A. Direct and noninvasive assessment of parafoveal capillary leukocyte velocity. Ophthalmology 2005 ,112,
2219–2224. [CrossRef]
33. Tam, J.; Martin, J.A.; Roorda, A. Noninvasive visualization and analysis of parafoveal capillaries in humans. Investig. Ophthalmol.
Vis. Sci. 2010, 51, 1691–1698. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Chui, T.Y.P .; Mo, S.; Krawitz, B.; Menon, N.R.; Choudhury, N.; Gan, A.; Razeen, M.; Shah, N.; Pinhas, A.; Rosen, R.B. Human
retinal microvascular imaging using adaptive optics scanning light ophthalmoscopy. Int. J. Retin. Vitr. 2016 ,2, 11. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
35. Carroll, J.; Neitz, M.; Hofer, H.; Neitz, J.; Williams, D.R. Functional photoreceptor loss revealed with adaptive optics: An alternate
cause of color blindness. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2004, 101, 8461–8466. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Wolfing, J.I.; Chung, M.; Carroll, J.; Roorda, A.; Williams, D.R. High-resolution retinal imaging of cone-rod dystrophy . Ophthalmology
2006, 113, 1019.e1. [CrossRef]
37. Li, K.Y.; Roorda, A. Automated identiﬁcation of cone photoreceptors in adaptive optics retinal images. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A Opt.
Image Sci. Vis. 2007, 24, 1358–1363. [CrossRef]
38. Bukowska, D.M.; Chew, A.L.; Huynh, E.; Kashani, I.; Wan, S.L.; Wan, P .M.; Chen, F.K. Semi-automated identiﬁcation of cones in
the human retina using circle Hough transform. Biomed. Opt. Express 2015, 6, 4676–4693. [CrossRef]
39. Chiu, S.J.; Lokhnygina, Y.; Dubis, A.M.; Dubra, A.; Carroll, J.; Izatt, J.A.; Farsiu, S. Automatic cone photoreceptor segmentation
using graph theory and dynamic programming. Biomed. Opt. Express 2013, 4, 924–937. [CrossRef]
40. Liu, J.; Dubra, A.; Tam, J. A fully automatic framework for cell segmentation on non-confocal adaptive optics images. In
Proceedings of the Medical Imaging 2016: Computer-Aided Diagnosis, San Diego, CA, USA, 27 February–3 March 2016;
pp. 654–660.
41. Hamwood, J.; Alonso-Caneiro, D.; Sampson, D.M.; Collins, M.J.; Chen, F.K. Automatic Detection of Cone Photoreceptors With
Fully Convolutional Networks. Transl. Vis. Sci. Technol. 2019, 8, 10. [CrossRef]
42. Lombardo, M.; Serrao, S.; Ducoli, P .; Lombardo, G. Eccentricity dependent changes of density, spacing and packing arrangement
of parafoveal cones. Ophthalmic Physiol. Opt. J. Br. Coll. Ophthalmic Opt. (Optom.) 2013, 33, 516–526. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Zaleska-Zmijewska, A.; Wawrzyniak, Z.M.; Ulinska, M.; Szaﬂik, J.; Dabrowska, A.; Szaﬂik, J.P . Human photoreceptor cone
density measured with adaptive optics technology (rtx1 device) in healthy eyes: Standardization of measurements. Medicine 2017 ,
96, e7300. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Mehta, R.A.; Akkali, M.C.; Jayadev, C.; Anuj, A.; Yadav, N.K. Morphometric analysis of retinal arterioles in control and
hypertensive population using adaptive optics imaging. Indian J. Ophthalmol. 2019, 67, 1673–1677. [CrossRef]
45. Frangi, A.F.; Niessen, W.J.; Vincken, K.L.; Viergever, M.A. Multiscale vessel enhancement ﬁltering. In Medical Image Computing
and Computer-Assisted Intervention—MICCAI’98: First International Conference, Cambridge, MA, USA, 11–13 October 1998; Springer:
Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 1998.Diagnostics 2023, 13, 2413 20 of 23
46. Zhang, Q.; Sampani, K.; Xu, M.; Cai, S.; Deng, Y.; Li, H.; Sun, J.K.; Karniadakis, G.E. AOSLO-net: A Deep Learning-Based Method
for Automatic Segmentation of Retinal Microaneurysms From Adaptive Optics Scanning Laser Ophthalmoscopy Images. Transl.
Vis. Sci. Technol. 2022, 11, 7. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47. Le, C.T.; Wang, D.; Villanueva, R.; Liu, Z.; Hammer, D.X.; Tao, Y.; Saeedi, O.J. Novel Application of Long Short-Term Memory
Network for 3D to 2D Retinal Vessel Segmentation in Adaptive Optics—Optical Coherence Tomography Volumes. Appl. Sci.
2021, 11, 9475. [CrossRef]
48. Legras, R.; Gaudric, A.; Woog, K. Distribution of cone density, spacing and arrangement in adult healthy retinas with adaptive
optics ﬂood illumination. PLoS ONE 2018, 13, e0191141. [CrossRef]
49. Makiyama, Y.; Ooto, S.; Hangai, M.; Takayama, K.; Uji, A.; Oishi, A.; Ogino, K.; Nakagawa, S.; Yoshimura, N. Macular cone
abnormalities in retinitis pigmentosa with preserved central vision using adaptive optics scanning laser ophthalmoscopy. PLoS
ONE 2013, 8, e79447. [CrossRef]
50. Tanna, P .; Kasilian, M.; Strauss, R.; Tee, J.; Kalitzeos, A.; Tarima, S.; Visotcky, A.; Dubra, A.; Carroll, J.; Michaelides, M. Reliability
and Repeatability of Cone Density Measurements in Patients With Stargardt Disease and RPGR-Associated Retinopathy. Investig.
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2017, 58, 3608–3615. [CrossRef]
51. Zayit-Soudry, S.; Sippl-Swezey, N.; Porco, T.C.; Lynch, S.K.; Syed, R.; Ratnam, K.; Menghini, M.; Roorda, A.J.; Duncan, J.L.
Repeatability of Cone Spacing Measures in Eyes With Inherited Retinal Degenerations. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2015 ,56,
6179–6189. [CrossRef]
52. Mc Glacken-Byrne, A.B.; Prentice, D.; Roshandel, D.; Brown, M.R.; Tuch, P .; Yau, K.S.; Sivadorai, P .; Davis, M.R.; Laing, N.G.;
Chen, F.K. High-resolution iris and retinal imaging in multisystemic smooth muscle dysfunction syndrome due to a novel
Asn117Lys substitution in ACTA2: A case report. BMC Ophthalmol. 2020, 20, 68. [CrossRef]
53. Meixner, E.; Michelson, G. Measurement of retinal wall-to-lumen ratio by adaptive optics retinal camera: A clinical research.
Graefes Arch Clin. Exp. Ophthalmol. 2015, 253, 1985–1995. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54. Koch, E.; Rosenbaum, D.; Brolly, A.; Sahel, J.A.; Chaumet-Riffaud, P .; Girerd, X.; Rossant, F.; Paques, M. Morphometric analysis of
small arteries in the human retina using adaptive optics imaging: Relationship with blood pressure and focal vascular changes.
J. Hypertens. 2014, 32, 890–898. [CrossRef]
55. Arichika, S.; Uji, A.; Ooto, S.; Muraoka, Y.; Yoshimura, N. Effects of age and blood pressure on the retinal arterial wall, analyzed
using adaptive optics scanning laser ophthalmoscopy. Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 12283. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56. Bakker, E.; Dikland, F.A.; van Bakel, R.; De Jesus, D.A.; Sanchez Brea, L.; Klein, S.; van Walsum, T.; Rossant, F.; Farias, D.C.; Grieve,
K.; et al. Adaptive optics ophthalmoscopy: A systematic review of vascular biomarkers. Surv. Ophthalmol. 2022 ,67, 369–387.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
57. Nesper, P .L.; Scarinci, F.; Fawzi, A.A. Adaptive Optics Reveals Photoreceptor Abnormalities in Diabetic Macular Ischemia. PLoS
ONE 2017, 12, e0169926. [CrossRef]
58. Michaelides, M.; Kaines, A.; Hamilton, R.D.; Fraser-Bell, S.; Rajendram, R.; Quhill, F.; Boos, C.J.; Xing, W.; Egan, C.; Peto, T.; et al.
A prospective randomized trial of intravitreal bevacizumab or laser therapy in the management of diabetic macular edema (BOLT
study) 12-month data: Report 2. Ophthalmology 2010, 117, 1078–1086.e2. [CrossRef]
59. Menghini, M.; Lujan, B.J.; Zayit-Soudry, S.; Syed, R.; Porco, T.C.; Bayabo, K.; Carroll, J.; Roorda, A.; Duncan, J.L. Correlation
of outer nuclear layer thickness with cone density values in patients with retinitis pigmentosa and healthy subjects. Investig.
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2014, 56, 372–381. [CrossRef]
60. Park, S.P .; Lee, W.; Bae, E.J.; Greenstein, V .; Sin, B.H.; Chang, S.; Tsang, S.H. Early structural anomalies observed by high-resolution
imaging in two related cases of autosomal-dominant retinitis pigmentosa. Ophthalmic Surg. Lasers Imaging Retin. 2014 ,45, 469–473.
[CrossRef]
61. Tojo, N.; Nakamura, T.; Fuchizawa, C.; Oiwake, T.; Hayashi, A. Adaptive optics fundus images of cone photoreceptors in the
macula of patients with retinitis pigmentosa. Clin. Ophthalmol. 2013, 7, 203–210. [CrossRef]
62. Ochinciuc, R.; Ochinciuc, U.; Balta, G.; Al Barri, L.; Pac, C.; Adrian, T.; Balta, F.; Burcea, M. High-resolution images in macular
disorders. Rom. J. Ophthalmol. 2021, 65, 204–211. [CrossRef]
63. Gale, M.J.; Feng, S.; Titus, H.E.; Smith, T.B.; Pennesi, M.E. Interpretation of Flood-Illuminated Adaptive Optics Images in Subjects
with Retinitis Pigmentosa. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 2016, 854, 291–297. [CrossRef]
64. Roshandel, D.; Lamey, T.M.; Charng, J.; Heath Jeffery, R.C.; McLaren, T.L.; Thompson, J.A.; De Roach, J.N.; McLenachan, S.;
Mackey, D.A.; Chen, F.K. Microperimetry and Adaptive Optics Imaging Reveal Localized Functional and Structural Changes in
Asymptomatic RPGR Mutation Carriers. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2023, 64, 3. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65. Ratnam, K.; Carroll, J.; Porco, T.C.; Duncan, J.L.; Roorda, A. Relationship between foveal cone structure and clinical measures of
visual function in patients with inherited retinal degenerations. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2013 ,54, 5836–5847. [CrossRef ]
[PubMed]
66. Roshandel, D.; Thompson, J.A.; Heath Jeffery, R.C.; Sampson, D.M.; Chelva, E.; McLaren, T.L.; Lamey, T.M.; De Roach, J.N.;
Durkin, S.R.; Chen, F.K. Multimodal Retinal Imaging and Microperimetry Reveal a Novel Phenotype and Potential Trial End
Points in CRB1-Associated Retinopathies. Transl. Vis. Sci. Technol. 2021, 10, 38. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67. Sun, L.W.; Johnson, R.D.; Langlo, C.S.; Cooper, R.F.; Razeen, M.M.; Russillo, M.C.; Dubra, A.; Connor, T.B., Jr.; Han, D.P .; Pennesi,
M.E.; et al. Assessing Photoreceptor Structure in Retinitis Pigmentosa and Usher Syndrome. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2016 ,
57, 2428–2442. [CrossRef]Diagnostics 2023, 13, 2413 21 of 23
68. Muthiah, M.N.; Kalitzeos, A.; Oprych, K.; Singh, N.; Georgiou, M.; Wright, G.A.; Robson, A.G.; Arno, G.; Khan, K.; Michaelides,
M. Novel disease-causing variant in RDH12 presenting with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa. Br. J. Ophthalmol. 2022 ,
106, 1274–1281. [CrossRef]
69. Lindberg, C.R.; Fishman, G.A.; Anderson, R.J.; Vasquez, V . Contrast sensitivity in retinitis pigmentosa. Br. J. Ophthalmol. 1981 ,65,
855–858. [CrossRef]
70. Akeo, K.; Hiida, Y.; Saga, M.; Inoue, R.; Oguchi, Y. Correlation between contrast sensitivity and visual acuity in retinitis
pigmentosa patients. Ophthalmologica 2002, 216, 185–191. [CrossRef]
71. Choi, S.S.; Doble, N.; Hardy, J.L.; Jones, S.M.; Keltner, J.L.; Olivier, S.S.; Werner, J.S. In vivo imaging of the photoreceptor mosaic
in retinal dystrophies and correlations with visual function. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2006, 47, 2080–2092. [CrossRef]
72. Duncan, J.L.; Zhang, Y.; Gandhi, J.; Nakanishi, C.; Othman, M.; Branham, K.E.; Swaroop, A.; Roorda, A. High-resolution imaging
with adaptive optics in patients with inherited retinal degeneration. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2007 ,48, 3283–3291. [CrossRef]
73. Song, H.; Rossi, E.A.; Stone, E.; Latchney, L.; Williams, D.; Dubra, A.; Chung, M. Phenotypic diversity in autosomal-dominant
cone-rod dystrophy elucidated by adaptive optics retinal imaging. Br. J. Ophthalmol. 2018, 102, 136–141. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
74. Song, H.; Latchney, L.; Williams, D.; Chung, M. Fluorescence adaptive optics scanning laser ophthalmoscope for detection of
reduced cones and hypoautoﬂuorescent spots in fundus albipunctatus. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2014 ,132, 1099–1104. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
75. Kominami, A.; Ueno, S.; Kominami, T.; Nakanishi, A.; Ito, Y.; Fujinami, K.; Tsunoda, K.; Hayashi, T.; Kikuchi, S.; Kameya, S.; et al.
Case of cone dystrophy with normal fundus appearance associated with biallelic POC1B variants. Ophthalmic Genet. 2018 ,39,
255–262. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76. Roorda, A.; Zhang, Y.; Duncan, J.L. High-resolution in vivo imaging of the RPE mosaic in eyes with retinal disease. Investig.
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2007, 48, 2297–2303. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
77. Kubota, D.; Gocho, K.; Kikuchi, S.; Akeo, K.; Miura, M.; Yamaki, K.; Takahashi, H.; Kameya, S. CEP250 mutations associated with
mild cone-rod dystrophy and sensorineural hearing loss in a Japanese family. Ophthalmic Genet. 2018, 39, 500–507. [CrossRef]
78. Ammar, M.J.; Scavelli, K.T.; Uyhazi, K.E.; Bedoukian, E.C.; Serrano, L.W.; Edelstein, I.D.; Vergilio, G.; Cooper, R.F.; Morgan, J.I.W.;
Kumar, P .; et al. Enhanced S-Cone Syndrome: Visual Function, Cross-Sectional Imaging, and Cellular Structure with Adaptive
Optics Ophthalmoscopy. Retin. Cases Brief Rep. 2021, 15, 694–701. [CrossRef]
79. Park, S.P .; Hong, I.H.; Tsang, S.H.; Lee, W.; Horowitz, J.; Yzer, S.; Allikmets, R.; Chang, S. Disruption of the human cone
photoreceptor mosaic from a defect in NR2E3 transcription factor function in young adults. Graefe’s Arch. Clin. Exp. Ophthalmol.
2013, 251, 2299–2309. [CrossRef]
80. Moore, A.; Strauss, R.; Dubis, A.; Cooper, R.; Ba-Abbad, R.; Moore, A.; Webster, A.; Dubra, A.; Carroll, J.; Michaelides, M. Retinal
Architecture in RGS9-and R9AP-Associated Retinal Dysfunction (Bradyopsia). Am. J. Ophthalmol. 2015, 160, 1269–1275.
81. Song, H.; Rossi, E.A.; Latchney, L.; Bessette, A.; Stone, E.; Hunter, J.J.; Williams, D.R.; Chung, M. Cone and rod loss in Stargardt
disease revealed by adaptive optics scanning light ophthalmoscopy. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2015, 133, 1198–1203. [CrossRef]
82. Chen, Y.; Ratnam, K.; Sundquist, S.M.; Lujan, B.; Ayyagari, R.; Gudiseva, V .H.; Roorda, A.; Duncan, J.L. Cone photoreceptor
abnormalities correlate with vision loss in patients with Stargardt disease. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2011 ,52, 3281–3292.
[CrossRef]
83. Razeen, M.M.; Cooper, R.F.; Langlo, C.S.; Goldberg, M.R.; Wilk, M.A.; Han, D.P .; Connor, T.B.; Fishman, G.A.; Collison, F.T.;
Sulai, Y.N. Correlating photoreceptor mosaic structure to clinical ﬁndings in Stargardt disease. Transl. Vis. Sci. Technol. 2016 ,5, 6.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
84. Scoles, D.; Sulai, Y.N.; Cooper, R.F.; Higgins, B.P .; Johnson, R.D.; Carroll, J.; Dubra, A.; Stepien, K.E. Photoreceptor Inner Segment
Morphology in Best Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy. Retina 2017, 37, 741–748. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
85. Liu, T.; Aguilera, N.; Bower, A.J.; Li, J.; Ullah, E.; Dubra, A.; Cukras, C.; Brooks, B.P .; Jeffrey, B.G.; Hufnagel, R.B.; et al. Photore-
ceptor and Retinal Pigment Epithelium Relationships in Eyes With Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy Revealed by Multimodal
Adaptive Optics Imaging. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2022, 63, 27. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86. Kay, D.B.; Land, M.E.; Cooper, R.F.; Dubis, A.M.; Godara, P .; Dubra, A.; Carroll, J.; Stepien, K.E. Outer retinal structure in best
vitelliform macular dystrophy. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2013, 131, 1207–1215. [CrossRef]
87. Ambrosio, L.; Williams, J.S.; Gutierrez, A.; Swanson, E.A.; Munro, R.J.; Ferguson, R.D.; Fulton, A.B.; Akula, J.D. Carbonic
anhydrase inhibition in X-linked retinoschisis: An eye on the photoreceptors. Exp. Eye Res. 2021, 202, 108344. [CrossRef]
88. Duncan, J.L.; Ratnam, K.; Birch, D.G.; Sundquist, S.M.; Lucero, A.S.; Zhang, Y.; Meltzer, M.; Smaoui, N.; Roorda, A. Abnormal
cone structure in foveal schisis cavities in X-linked retinoschisis from mutations in exon 6 of the RS1 gene. Investig. Ophthalmol.
Vis. Sci. 2011, 52, 9614–9623. [CrossRef]
89. Akeo, K.; Kameya, S.; Gocho, K.; Kubota, D.; Yamaki, K.; Takahashi, H. Detailed Morphological Changes of Foveoschisis in
Patient with X-Linked Retinoschisis Detected by SD-OCT and Adaptive Optics Fundus Camera. Case Rep. Ophthalmol. Med. 2015 ,
2015, 432782. [CrossRef]
90. Morgan, J.I.; Han, G.; Klinman, E.; Maguire, W.M.; Chung, D.C.; Maguire, A.M.; Bennett, J. High-resolution adaptive optics
retinal imaging of cellular structure in choroideremia. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2014, 55, 6381–6397. [CrossRef]
91. Sun, L.W.; Johnson, R.D.; Williams, V .; Summerfelt, P .; Dubra, A.; Weinberg, D.V .; Stepien, K.E.; Fishman, G.A.; Carroll, J.
Multimodal Imaging of Photoreceptor Structure in Choroideremia. PLoS ONE 2016, 11, e0167526. [CrossRef]Diagnostics 2023, 13, 2413 22 of 23
92. Tuten, W.S.; Vergilio, G.K.; Young, G.J.; Bennett, J.; Maguire, A.M.; Aleman, T.S.; Brainard, D.H.; Morgan, J.I.W. Visual Function
at the Atrophic Border in Choroideremia Assessed with Adaptive Optics Microperimetry. Ophthalmol. Retin. 2019 ,3, 888–899.
[CrossRef]
93. Aguilera, N.; Liu, T.; Bower, A.J.; Li, J.; Abouassali, S.; Lu, R.; Giannini, J.; Pfau, M.; Bender, C.; Smelkinson, M.G.; et al.
Widespread subclinical cellular changes revealed across a neural-epithelial-vascular complex in choroideremia using adaptive
optics. Commun. Biol. 2022, 5, 893. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
94. Foote, K.G.; Rinella, N.; Tang, J.; Bensaid, N.; Zhou, H.; Zhang, Q.; Wang, R.K.; Porco, T.C.; Roorda, A.; Duncan, J.L. Cone
Structure Persists Beyond Margins of Short-Wavelength Autoﬂuorescence in Choroideremia. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2019 ,
60, 4931–4942. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
95. Morgan, J.I.W.; Jiang, Y.Y.; Vergilio, G.K.; Serrano, L.W.; Pearson, D.J.; Bennett, J.; Maguire, A.M.; Aleman, T.S. Short-term
Assessment of Subfoveal Injection of Adeno-Associated Virus-Mediated hCHM Gene Augmentation in Choroideremia Using
Adaptive Optics Ophthalmoscopy. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2022, 140, 411–420. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
96. Bower, A.J.; Liu, T.; Aguilera, N.; Li, J.; Liu, J.; Lu, R.; Giannini, J.P .; Huryn, L.A.; Dubra, A.; Liu, Z.; et al. Integrating adaptive
optics-SLO and OCT for multimodal visualization of the human retinal pigment epithelial mosaic. Biomed. Opt. Express 2021 ,12,
1449–1466. [CrossRef]
97. Morgan, J.I.W.; Chen, M.; Huang, A.M.; Jiang, Y.Y.; Cooper, R.F. Cone Identiﬁcation in Choroideremia: Repeatability, Reliability,
and Automation Through Use of a Convolutional Neural Network. Transl. Vis. Sci. Technol. 2020, 9, 40. [CrossRef]
98. Sampson, D.M.; Roshandel, D.; Chew, A.L.; Wang, Y.; Stevenson, P .G.; Cooper, M.N.; Ong, E.; Wong, L.; La, J.; Alonso-Caneiro, D.;
et al. Retinal Differential Light Sensitivity Variation Across the Macula in Healthy Subjects: Importance of Cone Separation and
Loci Eccentricity. Transl. Vis. Sci. Technol. 2021, 10, 16. [CrossRef]
99. Ueno, S.; Koyanagi, Y.; Kominami, T.; Ito, Y.; Kawano, K.; Nishiguchi, K.M.; Rivolta, C.; Nakazawa, T.; Sonoda, K.-H.; Terasaki, H.
Clinical characteristics and high resolution retinal imaging of retinitis pigmentosa caused by RP1 gene variants. Jpn. J. Ophthalmol.
2020, 64, 485–496. [CrossRef]
100. Kalitzeos, A.; Kumaran, N.; Georgiou, M.; Singh, N.; Kane, T.; Kasilian, M.; Dubra, A.; Carroll, J.; Michaelides, M. Natural history
of foveal cone structure in RPE65-associated Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA). Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2019, 60, 4584.
101. Huang, Z.; Zhang, D.; Thompson, J.A.; Jamuar, S.S.; Roshandel, D.; Jennings, L.; Mellough, C.; Charng, J.; Chen, S.-C.; McLaren,
T.L. Deep clinical phenotyping and gene expression analysis in a patient with RCBTB1-associated retinopathy. Ophthalmic Genet.
2021, 42, 266–275. [CrossRef]
102. Nakamura, T.; Ueda-Consolvo, T.; Oiwake, T.; Hayashi, A. Correlation between outer retinal layer thickness and cone density in
patients with resolved central serous chorioretinopathy. Graefes Arch Clin. Exp. Ophthalmol. 2016, 254, 2347–2354. [CrossRef]
103. Kabata¸ s, N.; Do˘ gan, A.¸ S.; Kabata¸ s, E.U.; Acar, M.; Biçer, T.; Gürdal, C. The effect of Demodex infestation on blepharitis and the
ocular symptoms. Eye Contact Lens Sci. Clin. Pract. 2017, 43, 64–67. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
104. Chew, A.L.; Sampson, D.M.; Kashani, I.; Chen, F.K. Agreement in Cone Density Derived from Gaze-Directed Single Images
Versus Wide-Field Montage Using Adaptive Optics Flood Illumination Ophthalmoscopy. Transl. Vis. Sci. Technol. 2017 ,6, 9.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
105. Lazareva, A.; Asad, M.; Slabaugh, G. Learning to deblur adaptive optics retinal images. In Proceedings of the International
Conference Image Analysis and Recognition, Montreal, QC, Canada, 5–7 July 2017; pp. 497–506.
106. Sampson, D.M.; Alonso-Caneiro, D.; Chew, A.L.; La, J.; Roshandel, D.; Wang, Y.; Khan, J.C.; Chelva, E.; Stevenson, P .G.; Chen, F.K.
Evaluation of focus and deep learning methods for automated image grading and factors inﬂuencing image quality in adaptive
optics ophthalmoscopy. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 16641. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
107. Merino, D.; Duncan, J.L.; Tiruveedhula, P .; Roorda, A. Observation of cone and rod photoreceptors in normal subjects and patients
using a new generation adaptive optics scanning laser ophthalmoscope. Biomed. Opt. Express 2011, 2, 2189–2201. [CrossRef]
108. Feng, S.; Gale, M.J.; Fay, J.D.; Faridi, A.; Titus, H.E.; Garg, A.K.; Michaels, K.V .; Erker, L.R.; Peters, D.; Smith, T.B.; et al. Assessment
of Different Sampling Methods for Measuring and Representing Macular Cone Density Using Flood-Illuminated Adaptive Optics.
Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2015, 56, 5751–5763. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
109. Debellemaniere, G.; Flores, M.; Tumahai, P .; Meillat, M.; Bidaut Garnier, M.; Delbosc, B.; Saleh, M. Assessment of parafoveal cone
density in patients taking hydroxychloroquine in the absence of clinically documented retinal toxicity. Acta Ophthalmol. 2015 ,93,
e534–e540. [CrossRef]
110. Roshandel, D.; Sampson, D.M.; Mackey, D.A.; Chen, F.K. Impact of Reference Center Choice on Adaptive Optics Imaging Cone
Mosaic Analysis. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2022, 63, 12. [CrossRef]
111. Ferguson, R.D.; Zhong, Z.; Hammer, D.X.; Mujat, M.; Patel, A.H.; Deng, C.; Zou, W.; Burns, S.A. Adaptive optics scanning
laser ophthalmoscope with integrated wide-ﬁeld retinal imaging and tracking. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A Opt. Image Sci. Vis. 2010 ,27,
A265–A277. [CrossRef]
112. Yang, Q.; Zhang, J.; Nozato, K.; Saito, K.; Williams, D.R.; Roorda, A.; Rossi, E.A. Closed-loop optical stabilization and digital
image registration in adaptive optics scanning light ophthalmoscopy. Biomed. Opt. Express 2014, 5, 3174–3191. [CrossRef]
113. Sheehy, C.K.; Tiruveedhula, P .; Sabesan, R.; Roorda, A. Active eye-tracking for an adaptive optics scanning laser ophthalmoscope.
Biomed. Opt. Express 2015, 6, 2412–2423. [CrossRef]Diagnostics 2023, 13, 2413 23 of 23
114. Yeo, B.; Sabuncu, M.; Vercauteren, T.; Ayache, N.; Fischl, B.; Golland, P . Spherical demons: Fast surface registration. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, New York, NY, USA, 6–10
September 2008; pp. 745–753.
115. Lee, S.; Lebed, E.; Sarunic, M.V .; Beg, M.F. Exact surface registration of retinal surfaces from 3-D optical coherence tomography
images. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2014, 62, 609–617. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
116. Foote, K.G.; De la Huerta, I.; Gustafson, K.; Baldwin, A.; Zayit-Soudry, S.; Rinella, N.; Porco, T.C.; Roorda, A.; Duncan, J.L. Cone
spacing correlates with retinal thickness and microperimetry in patients with inherited retinal degenerations. Investig. Ophthalmol.
Vis. Sci. 2019, 60, 1234–1243. [CrossRef]
117. Viana, K.Í.; Messias, A.; Siqueira, R.C.; Rodrigues, M.W.; Jorge, R. Structure-functional correlation using adaptive optics, OCT,
and microperimetry in a case of occult macular dystrophy. Arq. Bras. De Oftalmol. 2017, 80, 118–121. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
118. Jacobson, S.G.; Cideciyan, A.V .; Huang, W.C.; Sumaroka, A.; Roman, A.J.; Schwartz, S.B.; Luo, X.; Sheplock, R.; Dauber, J.M.;
Swider, M. TULP1 mutations causing early-onset retinal degeneration: Preserved but insensitive macular cones. Investig.
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2014, 55, 5354–5364. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
119. Makiyama, Y.; Ooto, S.; Hangai, M.; Ogino, K.; Gotoh, N.; Oishi, A.; Yoshimura, N. Cone abnormalities in fundus albipunctatus
associated with RDH5 mutations assessed using adaptive optics scanning laser ophthalmoscopy. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 2014 ,157,
e551–e554. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
120. Garway-Heath, D.F.; Caprioli, J.; Fitzke, F.W.; Hitchings, R.A. Scaling the hill of vision: The physiological relationship between
light sensitivity and ganglion cell numbers. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2000, 41, 1774–1782.
121. Chew, A.L.; Sampson, D.M.; Chelva, E.; Khan, J.C.; Chen, F.K. Perifoveal interdigitation zone loss in hydroxychloroquine
toxicity leads to subclinical bull’s eye lesion appearance on near-infrared reﬂectance imaging. Doc. Ophthalmol. 2018 ,136, 57–68.
[CrossRef]
122. Datlinger, F.; Wassermann, L.; Reumueller, A.; Hajdu, D.; Steiner, I.; Salas, M.; Drexler, W.; Pircher, M.; Schmidt-Erfurth, U.;
Pollreisz, A. Assessment of Detailed Photoreceptor Structure and Retinal Sensitivity in Diabetic Macular Ischemia Using Adaptive
Optics-OCT and Microperimetry. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2021, 62, 1. [CrossRef]
123. Foote, K.G.; Wong, J.J.; Boehm, A.E.; Bensinger, E.; Porco, T.C.; Roorda, A.; Duncan, J.L. Comparing Cone Structure and Function
in RHO- and RPGR-Associated Retinitis Pigmentosa. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2020, 61, 42. [CrossRef]
124. Wang, Q.; Tuten, W.S.; Lujan, B.J.; Holland, J.; Bernstein, P .S.; Schwartz, S.D.; Duncan, J.L.; Roorda, A. Adaptive optics
microperimetry and OCT images show preserved function and recovery of cone visibility in macular telangiectasia type 2 retinal
lesions. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2015, 56, 778–786. [CrossRef]
125. Mariotti, L.; Devaney, N.; Lombardo, G.; Lombardo, M. Understanding the changes of cone reﬂectance in adaptive optics ﬂood
illumination retinal images over three years. Biomed. Opt. Express 2016, 7, 2807–2822. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
126. Bensinger, E.; Wang, Y.; Roorda, A. Patches of Dysﬂective Cones in Eyes With No Known Disease. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci.
2022, 63, 29. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
127. Rha, J.; Schroeder, B.; Godara, P .; Carroll, J. Variable optical activation of human cone photoreceptors visualized using a short
coherence light source. Opt. Lett. 2009, 34, 3782–3784. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
128. Jonnal, R.S.; Besecker, J.R.; Derby, J.C.; Kocaoglu, O.P .; Cense, B.; Gao, W.; Wang, Q.; Miller, D.T. Imaging outer segment renewal
in living human cone photoreceptors. Opt. Express 2010, 18, 5257–5270. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.