 International Journal of  
Molecular Sciences
Review
Next-Generation Sequencing Applications for Inherited
Retinal Diseases
Adrian Dockery *
 , Laura Whelan
 , Pete Humphries and G. Jane Farrar
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Dockery, A.; Whelan, L.;
Humphries, P .; Farrar, G.J.
Next-Generation Sequencing
Applications for Inherited Retinal
Diseases. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22,
5684. https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijms22115684
Academic Editors: Luca Agnelli and
Giovanni Malerba
Received: 26 April 2021
Accepted: 22 May 2021
Published: 26 May 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).The School of Genetics & Microbiology, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland; whelanl1@tcd.ie (L.W.);
pete.humphries@tcd.ie (P .H.); jane.farrar@tcd.ie (G.J.F.)
*Correspondence: dockerya@tcd.ie
Abstract: Inherited retinal diseases (IRDs) represent a collection of phenotypically and genetically
diverse conditions. IRDs phenotype(s) can be isolated to the eye or can involve multiple tissues.
These conditions are associated with diverse forms of inheritance, and variants within the same gene
often can be associated with multiple distinct phenotypes. Such aspects of the IRDs highlight the
difﬁculty met when establishing a genetic diagnosis in patients. Here we provide an overview of
cutting-edge next-generation sequencing techniques and strategies currently in use to maximise
the effectivity of IRD gene screening. These techniques have helped researchers globally to ﬁnd
elusive causes of IRDs, including copy number variants, structural variants, new IRD genes and
deep intronic variants, among others. Resolving a genetic diagnosis with thorough testing enables
a more accurate diagnosis and more informed prognosis and should also provide information on
inheritance patterns which may be of particular interest to patients of a child-bearing age. Given that
IRDs are heritable conditions, genetic counselling may be offered to help inform family planning,
carrier testing and prenatal screening. Additionally, a veriﬁed genetic diagnosis may enable access to
appropriate clinical trials or approved medications that may be available for the condition.
Keywords: genetic diagnosis; inherited retinal disease; rare disease; retina; sequencing; diagnostics;
macula; genomics; variant interpretation; eye
1. Introduction
A primary focus in ocular genetics globally is accurate genotyping of patients with
rare inherited retinal diseases (IRDs). Next-generation sequencing (NGS) has been a com-
mon strategy employed in many countries to achieve this goal for several years [ 1–16].
This review focuses on the various methods and strategies that are being implemented
to elucidate the genetic pathogenesis of IRDs and provides an overview of how these
approaches have evolved. IRDs have an estimated prevalence of 1 in 4000 [ 17]. With a cur-
rent global population of approximately 7.8 billion [ 18], it is estimated that approximately
2 million people currently have some form of IRD.
As a global community involved in ocular genetics, the common goal is to achieve a di-
agnostic success rate of 100% for all IRD patients enrolled in clinical studies. This objective,
however, presents several challenges. Firstly, over 270 genes have been associated with the
aetiologies of IRDs (RetNet, Retinal Information Network, https://sph.uth.edu/retnet/
accessed on 20 April 2021) [ 19]. Furthermore, extensive diversity in clinical presentation
due to mutations even within a single IRD gene, as well as intersecting clinical phenotypes
and phenocopies, is encountered. Mutations in disease genes may affect the retina in
isolation, or may have more systemic effects. For example, there are 80 systemic conditions
with a retinal phenotype and 200 genes that not only affect retinal health but also the central
nervous system, kidneys or heart [ 20]. Such complexity makes it near-impossible for a di-
agnosis to be achieved in most instances solely on the basis of disease phenotype [ 2,21–23].
Furthermore, even a single pathogenic variant can manifest with phenotypic variability [ 24].
For some IRDs, modiﬁer loci have been identiﬁed, somewhat blurring the borders between
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 5684. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22115684 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijmsInt. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 5684 2 of 20
Mendelian and polygenic forms of IRD and mirroring similar observations with other
disease aetiologies [25,26].
In this review, we aim to provide an overview of the NGS strategies employed globally
to maximise the detection of IRD-causing mutations. This includes the use of targeted gene
panels for all IRD phenotypes or phenotypic subsets; whole-exome sequencing (WES);
whole-gene sequencing, whereby an IRD gene’s 50and 30sequences, exons and introns are
interrogated; whole-genome sequencing (WGS); and bespoke methods to compliment other
strategies, such as structural variant (SV) detection and copy number variant detection
(CNV), among many others. In parallel with the use of the above technologies for the
identiﬁcation of candidate IRD-causing sequence variants, a wide array of methods to
explore the functional effects of sequence variants have also been developed, and these
are discussed.
While NGS technologies have enabled rapid characterisation of the genetic architecture
of IRDs in many disease cohorts with diagnostic rates often approximating 70% [ 27],
much still remains to be optimised. Strategies currently under development to further
improve diagnostic rates are reviewed herein, as are the approaches being employed to
enable interpretation of novel coding and non-coding candidate variants. Additionally,
given the availability of increased numbers of WGS sequences from IRD and control
populations, a greater focus is placed on the elucidation of the genetic modiﬁer loci that
may inﬂuence the effect(s) of the primary disease-causing mutations. An overview of the
ﬁndings to date is provided.
2. IRDs—Target Panels and Whole Exome Studies
To elucidate the genetic contributions to IRDs, DNA, typically isolated from saliva or
peripheral blood sample, is analysed. Optimal processing of the sample will depend on
which form NGS is to be employed. In terms of both cost and data generated, NGS methods
ranging from low to high involve targeted sequencing (TS), whole-exome sequencing (WES)
or whole-genome sequencing (WGS). WES exclusively captures the protein-coding exons,
but only accounts for approximately 1% of the genome. It is important to note that exon-
based sequencing is likely to also reliably detect intronic variants located close to the
targeted exons, such as non-canonical splice site variants, which are known causes of
IRDs [ 28–30]. WGS is signiﬁcantly more comprehensive including introns, promoters,
and intergenic regions; in principle sequencing every nucleotide possible in a sample.
TS typically captures the smallest amount of genetic information but does so in a completely
customisable manner. For example, some IRD phenotypes are associated with pathogenic
variants in a very small number of genes, but some of those genes may also be known to
harbour pathogenic deep-intronic variants. In this case, adopting a TS approach would be
more fruitful than WES. Arguably, WGS could also be used for this purpose but would
generate more off-target data requiring signiﬁcantly greater levels of analysis and storage
and the on-target data would likely be less than a TS approach.
The beneﬁts of TS are that it is an economical method of focusing sequencing capacity
in smaller genomic regions including noncoding regions, therefore maximizing the cover-
age of clinically relevant genes. Enhanced coverage translates to greater sequencing read
depth which is valuable, for example, to increase the resolution of detecting genetic variants
and to detect smaller levels of heteroplasmy in the mitochondrial genome, or mosaicism
in the nuclear genome [ 31–34]. By reducing the size of the region of genome sequenced
per sample, a greater number of samples can be multiplexed together and processed in
the same sequencing run. There are other cost-savings elements to TS, smaller ﬁle sizes
allow for cheaper storage and faster processing. Moreover, targeting speciﬁc regions of
the genome previously implicated in IRDs, can massively reduce the risk of detecting
secondary or incidental ﬁndings.Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 5684 3 of 20
For these reasons, TS strategies have frequently been employed for IRD screening for
many years. Shortcomings of a TS strategy are that it often involves multiple gene panels
for different conditions and if new IRD genes are identiﬁed or new variant associations are
made for genes outside of the panel, a panel redesign will be required to include them. It is
possible to use TS to detect indicators of large structural variants; however, such genomic
breakpoints would likely have to occur within the captured loci reducing the likelihood of
identiﬁcation [1].
The customisable element of TS has become increasingly valuable with the recent de-
tection of several population-enriched rare pathogenic variants likely due to founder effects.
For example, a novel PDE6B variant was observed in the M ¯aori IRD participant group and
is likely to account for 16% of all recessive IRDs in that population [ 35]. Similarly, EYS gene
variants were found to be causative in 51% of a RP cohort from Japan [ 36]. This discovery
is not unique, as several other parallel studies have revealed similar founder mutations
in their target populations, for example, Belgium, RAX2 [37]; Costa Rica, RPE65 [38]; Fin-
land, CERKL [39]; Japan, EYS [36]; Spain, RP1 [40] and ABCA4 [41]; Jewish community
in Caucasia, PDE6B [42]; Pakistan, ABCA4 and NMNAT1 [43]; Guyana, BBS9 [44]; and
Faroe Islands, MERTK [45]. The enrichment of these variants, several of which are large
structural variants, emphasises the value of population-speciﬁc TS panels to target and
detect mutations and mutational breakpoints that may be missed by commercial generic
gene panel sequencing or even WES.
The use of WES has increased in popularity in recent years (Table 1) compared to previ-
ous metadata reported [ 27] and has many advantages over the TS approach. An effective TS
panel design can be optimised with prior knowledge of the spectrum of mutations capable
of causing the patient’s condition. This includes but is not limited to, knowledge of possible
founder mutations in the population, all possible genotype–phenotype associations and
breakpoint locations of any large structural variants that may exist. WES is agnostic to
these issues. Although WES is not capable of detecting deep intronic mutations without
modifying the method, it enables exonic variants to be detected even if their relevance
is not entirely elucidated at the time of capture. This provides the potential for future
interrogation of WES data as new IRD genes are discovered. Importantly, WES allows for
the potential future resolution of a previously unsolved diagnosis.
Table 1. Screening studies of inherited retinal disease (IRD) populations. CRD = cone–rod dystrophy; LCA = Lebers
congenital amaurosis; IRD = inherited retinal dystrophy; MD = macular dystrophy; RP = retinitis pigmentosa; TC = target
capture; WES = whole-exome sequencing; WGS = whole-genome sequencing.
Country Author Year Pedigrees Solve Rate Cohort Details TC (Genes) WES WGS
Australia Thompson [46] 2017 34 90 LCA Yes - -
Brazil Motta [47] 2018 559 72 IRD Yes Yes -
China Liu [48] 2020 800 60 RP Yes Yes -
China Gao [49] 2019 1243 72 RP 586 - -
China Liu [50] 2020 182 48 IRD Yes Yes -
China (Han) Huang [51] 2017 98 41 RP - Yes -
China Dan [52] 2020 76 57 IRD Yes Yes -
China Wang [53] 2018 319 39 IRD Yes Yes -
Finland Avela [54] 2019 53 77 IRD Yes - -
Germany Weisschuh [55] 2020 1785 69 IRD Yes - -
Germany Birtel [56] 2018 251 74 MD/CRD Yes - -
Iran Tayebi [57] 2019 50 72 IRD Yes - -
Ireland Whelan [58] 2020 710 70 IRD Yes - -
Israel Sharon [59] 2020 2420 56 IRD Yes Yes Yes
Japan Koyanagi [60] 2019 1204 30 RP Yes - -
Japan Numa [36] 2020 220 45 RP Yes - Yes
Korea Surl [61] 2020 50 78 LCA Yes Yes -
Korea Kim [62] 2019 86 44 IRD Yes - -Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 5684 4 of 20
Table 1. Cont .
Country Author Year Pedigrees Solve Rate Cohort Details TC (Genes) WES WGS
Mexico Zenteno [63] 2019 143 66 IRD Yes - -
Norway Holtan [17] 2020 650 32 IRD Yes - -
Poland Wawrocka [64] 2018 18 39 CRD Yes Yes -
Polynesian and M ¯aori Vincent [35] 2017 16 44 IRD Yes - -
Spain Perea-Romero [41] 2021 3951 53 IRD Yes Yes Yes
Spain Martin-Merida [65] 2019 877 38 RP Yes - -
Spain Gonz àlez-Duarte [ 66] 2019 73 85 IRD Yes - -
Spain Diñeiro [67] 2020 100 45 IRD Yes - -
Taiwan Chen [68] 2020 60 53 IRD Yes - -
Tunisia Habibi [69] 2020 73 68 IRD - Yes -
UAE Khan [70] 2020 71 100 Pediatric IRD Yes Yes -
UAE Patel [71] 2018 75 82 IRD Yes Yes -
UK Jiman [72] 2020 106 49 Syndromic IRD Yes - -
UK Shah [73] 2020 655 43 IRD Yes - -
UK Carss [74] 2017 722 56 IRD - Yes Yes
UK Lenassi [75] 2020 201 64 Pediatric IRD Yes - -
UK Patel [76] 2019 277 25 Pediatric IRD Yes - -
UK Taylor [77] 2017 85 79 Pediatric IRD Yes - -
USA and Canada Goetz [78] 2020 5385 62 IRD Yes - -
USA Stone [79] 2017 1000 76 IRD - Yes -
USA Bryant [80] 2018 69 64 IRD - Yes -
Further to this point, many disease phenotype-based gene panels are very speciﬁc and
therefore typically target only a small number of genes, not allowing for the possibility of
new genotype–phenotype correlations or ambiguous phenotypes. Indeed, it was recently
established that 23% of cases analysed would not have been resolved if they were sequenced
by a commercial panel designed speciﬁcally for a patient’s phenotype [ 81]. In the same
study, it was also found that for 26% of participants, the cheapest applicable commercial
gene panel would have been costlier than performing WES for those patients.
Several large IRD screening studies in recent years have sought to identify the genes
responsible for the largest proportions of their cohorts’ IRDs. In the UK, over 3000 pedigrees
were reviewed, and it was determined that 135 IRD genes contributed to the genetic
pathogenesis of the cohort. Interestingly, 70% of resolved cases were deemed to have
causative mutations in 20 genes only [ 82]. Similarly, in over 5000 pedigrees with genetic
eye conditions from Canada and the US, 68% of pathogenic or likely pathogenic mutations
were identiﬁed in just 10 genes [ 78]. Both of these large studies identiﬁed ABCA4 ,USH2A
andRPGR as the top three genes contributing to IRDs.
Although clearly not 100% effective, smaller whole-gene panels may be very effective
as a ﬁrst-tier screening approach. Several gene associations have been recently ﬂagged as
unlikely to be as pathogenic as initially reported. Nineteen percent of queried autosomal
dominant retinitis pigmentosa (adRP) genes were deemed to harbour variants unlikely
to be disease-causing for reasons relating to their respective allele frequencies or variant
interpretation at that time [ 83]. Such variant “false positives” are shortcomings of the
diagnostic odyssey, and this implies that, for an initial screening procedure, there may not
be the need to screen as many of the genes and variants that are typically included in large
gene panel screening studies.
It is important to also note that there have been many reports of the occurrence
of multiple IRDs within the same family, or even within a single individual. Although
individually IRDs are rare globally, the concurrence of multiple IRDs in a patient or pedigree
unfortunately represents another diagnostic challenge. Our team has previously reported
a pedigree in which ﬁve affected members of the family were broadly categorised as RP
phenotypes. After genetic investigation it was revealed that four of these individuals were
homozygous for a FLVCR1 variant, while the remaining affected patient was compound
heterozygous for pathogenic variants in NR2E3 [84]. Similarly, in a US study, involving
three IRD pedigrees, each given an initial diagnosis of RP , one with a dominant RP and
the other two with a dominant, incompletely penetrant RP , it was found that multiple IRDInt. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 5684 5 of 20
genes were responsible for various affected individuals in each of the three families: both
USH2A andRP1 was segregating in one family; PRPH2 andCRX in a second family and
PRPH2 ,PRPH8 andUSH2A in the third family [ 85]. These studies, however, are trumped
in complexity by Birtel et al.’s analysis of a single family with four different IRDs each
caused by distinct pathogenic variants and inheritance patterns: father, RHO , dominant RP;
mother, ABCA4 andCACNA1F , recessive Stargardt and CSNB; ﬁrst son, CACNA1F , CSNB;
second son, MITF , dominant Waardenburg syndrome [ 86]. These are some examples of the
many that exist, illustrating the complexity of IRD screening and reinforcing the necessity
of thorough clinical and genetic investigation prior to genetic counselling [87].
3. Expanding IRD Diagnosis via Whole-Gene or WGS
For any laboratory electing to use NGS, it is essential that the limitations of the NGS
approach to be employed are known. Failure to appropriately sequence the target genomic
sites clearly will limit the success rate from the outset. Three consistent biases that exist for
WES but not WGS are strand bias, evenness of coverage and the proportion of transcripts
covered in their entirety. Interestingly, it has also been found that WGS provides a 3%
better coverage of exons compared to WES, 98% versus 95% [ 88]. In another study it was
found that the WGS approach offered superior detection of structural variants, variants
in regulatory regions and detection of variants in GC-rich regions compared to WES [ 74].
However, this additional superior detection comes at a signiﬁcant ﬁnancial cost. A review
of studies that used WES and WGS for clinical practice revealed that the price range for
WGS studies was approximately ﬁve times higher for WGS on a per sample basis [89].
Costs incurred by WGS include not only the upfront cost of sequencing, but also addi-
tional downstream expenses. WGS produces vastly more data, thus immediately requiring
additional computational power, people hours and storage to process. Although storage
issues may be a limiting factor in the budgets of most research groups, policies regarding
data storage can be readily adjusted to meet the needs of the research group, as the needs of
two research groups will rarely be the same. This bespoke approach is advisable to avoid
issues such as inadequate infrastructure and overspending. Raw sequencing ﬁles (such as
.fastq ﬁles) and output ﬁles (variant call ﬁles, .vcf) are relatively small in comparison to the
alignment ﬁles (such as .bam ﬁles) that need to be produced as part of the analyses [ 90–92].
Given this information, it is possible to reduce the capacity required for long term storage
of sequencing data by electing to discard the alignment ﬁles but keeping the input and
output ﬁles so that the analysis can be repeated at a later date and outputs can be compared
for discrepancies and newer discoveries. However, increased storage will be required again
upon reanalysis, as new alignment ﬁles will be created as part of the process.
Another viable alternative in reducing the disk footprint of alignment ﬁles, is the use
of additionally compressed formats, such as .cram ﬁles. This format uses reference-based
compression, only storing base calls that differ to the reference genome used. This com-
pression can be either lossless or can incur a reduction in base quality scores corresponding
to the level of compression. Even the lossless format offers a 40–50% reduction in space
required by comparison with BAM [ 93]. In addition, the use of WGS as a second-tier
approach, for cases that remain genetically unresolved following ﬁrst-tier sequencing
will decrease data-storage demands. More research groups are now making the move to
cloud-based storage for their NGS data and minimising the amount of data stored has
a direct impact on cost [ 94]. It is important to note that sample processing and analyses
are available via cloud-based solutions also, and may be an attractive option for research
groups lacking the necessary in-house infrastructure to process NGS data [95].
The additional cost of larger-scale analysis is not the only hazard associated with
this data management. Both WES and WGS have an increased likelihood of carrying
intrinsic responsibilities regarding the management of incidental or secondary ﬁndings
(SFs) unrelated to the initial indication for sequencing. For example, Hart et al. (2018)
found that a SF is detected in 1.7% of patients who undergo WES [ 96]. Some IRD studies
have employed a nested targeted approach, wherein the entire genome of an individualInt. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 5684 6 of 20
is sequenced but only variants in genes relevant to the IRD phenotype are interrogated
by use of variant ﬁltering with a virtual gene panel. This still provides beneﬁts over
traditional targeted panels, as it also includes sequencing of non-coding regions, as well
as the potential for analysis of an expanded panel in the future. For example, Carss et al.
(2017) performed WES on 117 individuals, identifying pathogenic variants in 59 cases [ 74].
Forty-ﬁve of the unresolved cases then underwent WGS and positive candidate variants
were identiﬁed in an additional 14 cases. This approach is likely chosen due to the immense
volume of data produced by WGS and WES, and the need to more rapidly analyse the
most relevant data available.
This approach also limits the possibility of detecting SFs. In SF v1.0, The American
College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) recommended analysis of 56 medi-
cally actionable gene–phenotype pairs which was then updated to a panel of 59 genes in
v2.0 [97,98]. ACMG SF v3.0, recommending the analysis of SFs in 73 gene–phenotype pairs,
was very recently released [ 99,100]. Of particular interest to the ocular genetics community,
ACMG SF v3.0 now includes the RPE65 gene. The RPE65 gene was included on the basis
that an FDA-approved gene therapy now exists for biallelic RPE65-retinopathies and that
patients may derive additional beneﬁt from earlier detection and therapeutic intervention.
The ACMG recommends application of these SF guidelines in a clinical setting as opposed
to a research setting. Nonetheless, as with all genomic testing, it is imperative that the pa-
tient’s interests are at the forefront. ACMG currently recommend that patients/guardians
have the choice to opt-out of SF testing. This highlights the necessity of an appropriate
and comprehensive pre-testing consent procedure. This includes and is not limited to
information pertaining to what will not be disclosed should the patient/guardian chose to
abstain from SF analysis and thorough pre-test and post-test counselling.
Despite additional costs, there may be diagnostic beneﬁts to employing WGS to resolve
genotypes. Lionel et al. investigated 103 cases of diverse genetic disorders comparing WGS
to targeted panel sequencing. Not only was the solve rate superior when WGS was used,
41% versus 24%, 18 diagnoses were made based on structural variants or intronic variants
that were not captured by the TS method [ 101]. Regardless of the substantial number of
genes identiﬁed and targeted by TS, as estimated from studies to date, the genetic cause
of 43% of all IRDs patients remains unknown and suggests the need for more studies
to employ WGS (Table 1). These missing genetic aberrations may reside in introns or
intergenic regions, both of which are captured by WGS. There is also the possibly of novel
IRD gene discovery that is facilitated by WGS. The superior uniformity of genome coverage
enabled by WGS also allows for greater sensitivity when detecting copy number variants
(CNVs) that are notoriously difﬁcult to detect by TS and WES.
A cost-effective alternative that retains many of the same beneﬁts as WGS is whole-
gene sequencing (GS). GS enables the capture of exonic, intronic and 50and 30regulatory
regions for a target gene of interest but has many of the same limitations as the TS ap-
proach, including strand bias and GC-rich impedance to capture. GS has been utilised very
successfully for cohorts with phenotypes associated with monogenic or near-monogenic
causes. For example, individuals affected with incomplete congenital stationary night
blindness (icCSNB) present with a recognisable phenotype. This form of icCSNB is pri-
marily associated with mutations in the CACNA1F gene. In a recent large genotyping
study of icCSNB–CACNA1F patients ( n= 189), 4% of CACNA1F causative variants were
attributed to intronic and synonymous mutations [ 102]. It is also probable that there are
additional intronic variants yet to be designated as pathogenic in the unresolved portion of
this cohort.
Similarly, Khan et al. investigated 1054 unresolved Stargardt cases with a GS ap-
proach. Stargardt disease is predominately caused by biallelic variants in the ABCA4 gene.
The authors of the study used a single-molecule molecular inversion probes (smMIPs)
approach, which proved reliable and cost-effective. Their study revealed the presence of
pathogenic SVs and deep-intronic variants in 25% of biallelic cases [ 103]. The smMIPs
method is gaining in popularity given its superior target capture and low cost compared toInt. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 5684 7 of 20
other TS capture methods. In a recent comparative study, 176 IRD patients were analysed
with both smMIPs and TS. The smMIPs approach demonstrated enhanced target coverage
(97.3% versus 93.9%) and was ﬁve times more cost effective when greater than 500 samples
were analysed [104].
The GS approach has also been combined with probes for other IRD genes to in-
vestigate if this combinatorial strategy could signiﬁcantly improve diagnostic rates for
a range of IRDs when compared to traditional exon-based TS IRD panels. The study
design encompassed a second-tier approach for patients who had one previous variant
found in USH2A ,ABCA4 andCEP290. These whole genes, plus exons of 76 additional
IRD genes and pathogenic intronic regions of two IRD genes were sequenced in an effort
to resolve the “one-hit” patients. An overall diagnostic rate of 58.6% was achieved; two
copy number variants were detected in USH2A [105]. Although this diagnostic rate was no
higher than the average study (Table 1), it does represent signiﬁcant improvements that
can be made to address the large proportion of unresolved patients identiﬁed by standard
screening studies. The structural variants established in this study would likely not have
been detected by use of a more traditional, purely exon-targeting design.
An improved GS study design as outlined above may have additional advantages.
TheRPGR gene is one example of an IRD gene that includes regions that are challenging
to sequence comprehensively with traditional TS or WES; sequencing through ORF15 is
impeded due to a low-complexity sequence composition [ 106]. However, it is vital to
capture this gene as, for example, it accounts for nearly 40% of X-linked retinopathies in
the UK. This makes pathogenic variants in this gene the third most-prevalent cause of IRDs
in this population [ 82]. In an Italian cohort of 48 RPGR -related RP cases, approximately
half had mutations in ORF15 and presented with a more severe phenotype than the other
causative variants in exons 1–14 of RPGR [107]. It has been suggested that the sequence
coverage of ORF15 could be optimised by modifying NGS library preparation, reducing
false-negatives, miscalled variants and false-positives when compared to traditional meth-
ods [ 108]. For this reason, many recent NGS screening studies have adopted bespoke
approaches to sequencing RPGR , including entirely separate analyses or spiking the NGS
libraries with separately generated amplicons for RPGR [50,53,56]. In another study im-
proved alignment of sequencing reads mapping to the ORF15 region by using a de novo
assembly approach were reported. The accuracy of sequencing can be quickly determined
for males when analysing the RPGR gene, as variants called in error will likely not be
represented in every sequencing read mapping to this region. Therefore, heterozygous
variant calls can be readily identiﬁed as errors, since males have only one copy of RPGR.
This de novo assembly approach reduced the number of false-heterozygous calls in males
and improved the accuracy of indel calls [109].
Another example of genes that beneﬁt from tailored GS design are those encoding the
opsins, OPN1LW (red cone cells) and OPN1MW (green cone cells). These genes encode
photopigments in the retina and pose an interesting challenge to sequencing efforts. These
two genes are 96% homologous which introduces unique challenges for the IRD gene
panel, as short-read sequencing may be unable to determine the best alignment option
when mapping back to the genome [ 110]. A new two-step method from Atilano et al.
has demonstrated that long-range PCR can generate speciﬁc long amplicons that can be
more readily mapped back to the genome [ 111]. This approach offers a solution that can be
analysed separately, by direct sequencing of the amplicons, or alternatively, as part of a
larger panel if long-read sequencing (LRseq) is used.
Sequencing the entirety of a gene also facilitates the detection of variants in the
upstream regulatory regions which have been implicated in retinal disease previously,
for example in Blue-Cone Monochromacy (BCM) [ 112]. In this condition, a c.  71A>C
promoter mutation was initially thought to decrease expression and cause a deutan colour
vision deﬁciency. However, after functional analyses, the mutation was revealed to result
in more than double the wild-type expression level of the gene [ 113]. Other deletions in
this area have also been shown to result in BCM phenotypes, suggesting that this gene isInt. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 5684 8 of 20
sensitive to alterations in both under and overexpression [ 114,115]. Similarly, Radziwon
et al. used luciferase reporter assays to assess upstream variants detected in the CHM gene
in patients with choroideremia. Both probands had variants at position c.  98: C>A and
C>T. Both mutations led to a reduction in luciferase activity and furthermore, the promoter
region for CHM was deﬁned as the region encompassing nucleotides c.  119 to c. 76 [116].
Regulatory mutations are often difﬁcult to interpret, particularly for genes associated
with recessive forms of inheritance. Previously, consanguineous pedigrees have been
useful for identifying homozygous variants in these cases, such as NMNAT -related Leber
congenital amaurosis (LCA) [ 117]. Variant interpretation can be further complicated as
such variants may not have strong effects on gene expression. In a recent study of promoter
variants in ELOVL4 two variants were found, c.  236 C>T (rs240307) and c.  90 G>C
(rs62407622) which resulted in 18% and 14% reduction in expressivity, respectively. How-
ever, as the patient in question had the variants in trans , a severe phenotype was observed,
much more than would have been expected from the modest effect of the two variants
analysed separately [ 118]. This detrimental synergistic effect may emphasise the threshold
sensitivity of retinal tissues and cell components to the dosage levels of this protein and its
downstream effects.
4. Copy Number and Structural Variants
As discussed above, TS and WES methods are the most universally utilised, yet they
are largely incapable of detecting large copy number variants (CNVs), structural variants
(SVs) and chromosomal rearrangements. In 2018, an extensive literature-mining endeavour
revealed that 1345 copy-number variants (CNVs)—speciﬁcally, 317 unique variants—had
been reported in 81 distinct IRD genes. When further analysed, the size of the gene
correlated with the reported numbers of CNVs associated with that gene. Additionally,
many of these large variants affected non-coding and potential cis-regulatory elements [ 119].
The relevance of such variant types is now recognised, and guidelines have been published
to assist in the interpretation and classiﬁcation of them, similarly to those published in
recent years for single-nucleotide variants [120,121].
CNVs and SVs can also vary signiﬁcantly in the complexity of their rearrangements.
Gross deletions have previously been detected in many genes, including BEST1 ,EYS,
MERTK ,USH2A and many more from the aforementioned study alone [ 119]. Large dele-
tions have also been reported in RPGR [122],CHM [58],OPN1LW /OPN1MW [123] and
USH1C [1], to name but a few. Deletions are likely to be the most detectable CNV type
given that most studies employ WES or TS to detect mutations. Homozygous deletions are
the most readily detectable from using these methods as the read coverage over the deleted
region would be zero, given no template exists for capture or ampliﬁcation. Heterozygous
deletions may be under-reported when using WES or TS, if signiﬁcant ampliﬁcation has
occurred, which may unintentionally normalise the ultimate read depth aligned to the
deleted region. For similar reasons, duplications can be very difﬁcult to detect with these
methods. However, such mutations can be more readily detected by WGS due to the
superior and more even coverage, or by more speciﬁc approaches, such as targeted locus
ampliﬁcation [ 119]. Some regions of the genome, such as the RP17 locus, have been shown
to harbour many complex CNV and SV variants associated with IRDs. These convoluted
rearrangements resulted in the interference of the surrounding genome architecture, dis-
rupting enhancer–promoter interactions, and resulting in aberrant gene expression [124].
Genomic rearrangements are more likely to be detected by the presence of broken
sequencing reads when aligned back to the reference genome. This occurs when a read,
or pair of reads, partially align to one part of the genome and partially to somewhere quite
different. This is applicable to translocations and inversions, as unlike CNVs, the read depth
is not expected to be altered in these scenarios. Given the signiﬁcant presence of retrotrans-
poson sequence in the human genome, it is not surprising that several retrotransposons
insertions have been reported to disrupt the functionality of IRD genes [ 125–127]. The BBS1
gene in particular, has been recently reported to harbour retrotransposons causative ofInt. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 5684 9 of 20
disease [ 128,129]. Retrotransposons, much like other large genomic insertions, can be
difﬁcult to detect as they are unlikely to disrupt read depth in the genomic region to
which they have relocated to, since alignment tools will align these reads to their original
positions in the genome. Broken reads may indicate that a rearrangement has occurred.
If breakpoints are detected, the region can be directly sequenced to shed light on the nature
of the SV . Alternatively, a de novo assembly approach may be used to reconstruct the
queried genome [ 130]. This approach will likely only be beneﬁcial in the case of WGS, since
TS or WES will likely not have sequenced the insert because the original genomic region
was not an intended target.
In one study, involving an investigation of PRPF31 -related disease, 45% of probands
(10 of 22) tested positive for a CNV . The PRPF31 gene has no obvious sequence elements
that may make it particularly susceptible to genomic rearrangement, such as long inter-
spersed nuclear elements (LINE) and long terminal repeat (LTR) elements [ 131]. The study
emphasises the importance of integrating CNV and SV detection into screening protocols,
even for genes that may not appear to be conventionally susceptible to genomic rearrange-
ments. The estimated prevalence of causative SVs in IRD cases is roughly 10% [ 51,131–133].
This is similar to ﬁndings from other rare disease cohorts as 12% of developmental dis-
orders are estimated to be caused by pathogenic CNVs, therefore CNV and SV detection
is recommended to be incorporated into ﬁrst-tier testing for that set of conditions [ 134].
In a large hearing loss screening study of over 1000 patients, 18% of resolved patients were
found to have causative CNVs [ 135]. CNV detection has also proven very useful in diag-
nosing atypical syndromic IRD cases resulting in novel genotype–phenotype associations
and the reﬁnement of complex phenotypes in multiple cases [136].
Many of the NGS methods discussed so far have revolved around short-read sequenc-
ing; however, long-read sequencing is arguably the superior approach for detection of
SVs and CNVs. Short-read sequencing is generally preferred to ensure that high-quality
data are produced [ 137]. However, this technology is greatly hindered by features of
the genome, such as repetitive elements, which are not only abundant in our genomes,
but also known to increase the likelihood of an SV event occurring in IRD genes [ 123,138].
Long-read sequencing offers superior sequencing of such regions and offers a chance to
more accurately recapitulate patients’ true genomic sequences through the use of de novo
assembly [ 139–141]. Results from several studies to date have revealed IRD-causing SVs by
the use of long-read sequencing, and in some cases, concluded that the complexity of the SV
was such that it was likely not possible to fully resolve it by short-read sequencing [ 44,142].
Another useful application of long-read sequencing is determining the phase of
potentially causative recessive variants. Determining the phase of variants is of critical
importance, as it may determine whether causative variants have been established, if in
trans , or not, if in cis. This task is challenging for IRD cases primarily for two reasons. Firstly,
variants causative of Mendelian IRDs are extremely rare in most cases. This prevents the
establishment of known haplotypes or complex alleles in most cases that may otherwise
indicate that the two detected variants are likely in cis. Secondly, many IRD screening
endeavours are still in their infancy. This results in the widest possible age range of patients,
since even patients with paediatric onset of their condition, may be elderly when screened.
This can often make segregation analysis difﬁcult, as many of their close family members
may be immobile or deceased. Long-read sequencing offers the interpreter a greater chance
of capturing both variants of interest within the same sequencing molecule and therefore
determining phase of the variants without the need for additional family members [140].
5. Modiﬁers of IRD Phenotypes
There are multiple examples of phenotypes manifesting signiﬁcantly differently in
IRD patients, even when harbouring the same mutation [ 24]. Such variability may be in
overall severity, age of onset or pattern of degeneration. While some instances may be
partially explained by variant haplotypes or known interactions with other genes, much ofInt. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 5684 10 of 20
the source of variation remains unknown [ 143]. It has also yet to be established how much
of this unknown contribution is genetic.
Pathogenic variants in PRPF31 are the second most common cause of autosomal
dominant retinitis pigmentosa [ 144]. PRPF31 is a universally expressed splicing-factor
and has a vital role in the processing of pre-mRNA. However, reduced expression of this
ubiquitous splicing-factor results in isolated retinal restricted disease, retinitis pigmentosa.
It has been shown in multiple studies that reduced levels of PRPF31 in the retina results
in the mis-splicing and reduced expression of several key IRD genes associated with
phototransduction and RNA processing [ 145,146]. This indirect mechanism of action may
partially explain the incomplete penetrance and variable severity frequently reported with
this IRD gene [ 144]. It has also been shown that minisatellite repeat elements (MSR1)
proximal to the promoter of PRPF31 can modify the expression of the gene. Alleles with
four copies of the MSR1 were shown to correlate with asymptomatic individuals, while
alleles with three copies of MSR1 greatly reduced the expression of PRPF31 [147].
Another key factor in the manifestation of an IRD relates to the naturally occurring
expression levels of the implicated genes. In a study by Green et al., IRD genes typically
associated with incomplete inheritance signiﬁcantly correlated with greater variability
in levels of expression in a healthy population in several tissue types, including the eye.
This implies that cisand or trans elements may be inﬂuencing variability in expression
and in turn, contribute to disease states in patients [ 148]. This may also result in higher-
than-expected allele frequencies for pathogenic variants located in these genes in “healthy”
control databases, such as gnomAD [149].
Several IRD genes have been found to harbour pathogenic splice mutations. Splice
mutations are associated with variable severity as the percentage of wild-type transcript
that can still be produced is dependent on the speciﬁc mutation in question [ 150]. It is
therefore plausible that some variants may only have marginal disruptive effects on normal
splicing and result in a sub-clinical phenotype. It is important that each of these variants
is evaluated to determine aberrant effect(s). They can be assessed by a variety of means.
The most readily available method to assess variants involves use of plasmid transfection to
recapitulate the patient’s mutation in mammalian cells. Minigene and Midigene constructs
incorporating exons and introns for the IRD gene and including the candidate splice muta-
tion have been hugely successful in providing empirical evidence of the functional effect of
candidate splice variants [ 150–153]. Patient-derived cell and/or 3D retinal organoid models
while more laborious to create, remove the need for transient expression of mutations as
the mutation is already present in the patient’s cells. Organoids provide a more retina-like
simulated environment to more accurately evaluate splice processing and thus have been
utilised for the interpretation of multiple IRD variants [154–156].
TheRPGR gene is another example of an IRD gene associated with variable disease
severity and age of onset. In the case of RPGR , this is particularly true of female carriers of
pathogenic variants. Random X-inactivation plays a decisive role on the severity of the IRD
manifestation. In a recent analysis, blood and saliva samples were taken from 77 female
carriers from 41 RPGR–IRD pedigrees. These samples were analysed for their methylation
patterns. It was found that X-inactivation ratios correlated with clinical severity and
could be useful indicators for prognostic purposes [ 157]. Another common feature of
RPGR pathogenesis is that missense variants often lack an ability to interact with other
key IRD gene products which results in the failure of RPGR to correctly localise to the
cilia as required [ 158]. Interestingly, this means that polymorphic variation in the other
interacting IRD genes, such as IQCB1 andRPGRIP1L , can further modify the dynamics of
this disrupted interaction [159].
Given that many IRDs involve progression over time, age is another modiﬁer of
disease. In several studies that have been mentioned previously, it was noted that diagnostic
rates are higher in younger patients. In Germany, the mean age of participants with a
positive molecular diagnosis was 39.8 years of age, whereas it was 46.3 years of age for
unresolved patients [ 55]. In the UK, patients enrolled with late-onset macular diseaseInt. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 5684 11 of 20
(50 years of age) were less likely to receive a genetic diagnosis (18.0%) compared with
patients with an onset of less than 50 years of age (24.2%) [ 73]. In the US, Stone et al.
also noted that younger entrants to their screening study were more likely to have their
disease-causing mutation identiﬁed [ 79]. These ﬁndings suggest that the genetic causes of
early onset IRDs are better established and possibly that ageing increases susceptibility to
polygenic, or perhaps non-genetic factors, making the older patient cohort more difﬁcult to
solve by current genetic screening approaches.
6. Impacts on IRD Diagnosis Outside of NGS Testing
The surge of NGS studies addressing diagnostic challenges in IRDs in the last decade
has also encouraged further developments in other areas related to IRD diagnosis. Massive
improvements have been made in ophthalmological imaging, not just in resolution, but also
in applications and options available to imaging technicians [ 160]. These techniques help
reﬁne phenotypes and can inform whether or not more advanced forms of imagery may
be useful for particular patients [ 161]. Machine learning (ML) is a branch of artiﬁcial
intelligence that focuses on the concept that systems can learn from training data, such as
expert-reviewed fundus images of IRD patients, and thereby learn to identify these patterns
independently. This involves expert curation to obtain the training dataset but has the
advantage of removing variability due to being a single assessor once training is complete.
For example, many studies employ ML to assess fundus and optical coherence tomography
images to train and predict outcomes for potential age-related macular degeneration
(AMD) patients, including risk of progression to a more severe disease state and response
to treatments [ 162–169]. This approach has enormous potential beneﬁts for improvement
of diagnostic and prognostic accuracy. For example, ML has been utilised for the detection
of ﬂeck lesions in fundus autoﬂuorescence imaging, a characteristic feature of Stargardt
disease. The ML approach could accurately identify and quantify ﬂeck lesions, a potential
outcome measure for future clinical trials [ 170]. Similarly, optic disc photography has
been used to systematically detect abnormalities of the optic disc [ 171]. ML strategies may
revolutionise the speed and accuracy at which new patients can be phenotyped in the clinic.
More accurate phenotyping may have beneﬁcial implications for NGS screening studies
also, particularly those utilising phenotype-based gene panels. Improving the effectiveness
of TS is likely to have the most widespread beneﬁts given the relative low cost (less than
$20 per sample), making TS the most readily accessible to diagnostic labs, especially those
with constrictive budgets [79].
While signiﬁcant advances in the clinical and genetic diagnosis of IRDs have been
made, implementation of IRD screening is under resourced in many countries. A recent
study into the cost-of-illness of IRDs in Ireland and the UK demonstrated that lack of
access to genetic testing, the absence of an international patient registry and the issues
regarding the reimbursement of therapies are common complexities faced by IRD patients
in these countries [ 172]. In the UK, surveyed IRD patients noted that they appreciated
pre-test counselling including a discussion of the possibility of an unexpected result [ 173].
Some countries are actively tackling the issue of integrating genetic services into future
planning for their healthcare systems. Portugal and Iran are two of the latest countries to
announce the launch of their nationwide registries for IRDs [ 174,175]. These registries aim
to increase accessibility for individuals, while also providing a comprehensive dataset for
investigators and clinicians to boost and develop their research. One such example is the
French Plan for Genomic Medicine 2025 [ 176]. This plan aims to improve healthcare by
organising and structuring new pathways to care and counselling while also reviewing the
current challenges impeding the implementation of genomic testing in France. Despite the
many great advances detailed in this review, the successful adaptation of IRD genomics
services into national healthcare programs is rare [ 177]. Given that the technology and
expertise is available and accessible to many research teams around the world (Table 1),
combining the ﬁndings from these studies with effective national healthcare screeningInt. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 5684 12 of 20
systems may enable better treatment and care through clinical genetic interventions for the
patient [177].
7. Conclusions
We are now in the age of genomic medicine, where genetic evidence can often pro-
vide precise and robust diagnoses. This evidence may inform prognoses and may aid
in directing care plans and therapeutic intervention. This growth has been supported
by rapid enhancements in DNA sequencing methodologies, analysis tools and skillsets.
The enormous impact of such advances is clearly exempliﬁed in the ﬁeld of IRDs. The true
genetic complexity of IRDs is more fully appreciated with mutations in more than 300 genes
implicated in IRDs among many other non-coding and modifying elements. It is clear that
many challenges exist for genetic screening of IRDs, as evident from the approximate 40%
portion of screened patients whose causative genetic elements are yet to be established.
Many of these cases may be resolved in the future as more comprehensive techniques,
such as WGS, are more routinely utilised. As such data becomes available, it will undoubt-
edly also increase our knowledge of genetic elements that have a modifying effect on IRD
manifestations and severities. Genetic-screening diagnostic rates are likely to also beneﬁt
from advances in technologies related to clinical phenotyping that, where appropriate,
may be augmented by machine-learning-based algorithms. Clearly another development
that should enhance IRD screening endeavours is the development of national databases
and genomics strategies to develop services and enhance clinical genetics collaborations
nationally and internationally.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, G.J.F. and A.D.; data curation, A.D. and L.W.; writing—
original draft preparation, A.D., P .H. and G.J.F.; writing—review and editing, A.D., L.W., G.J.F.
and P .H.; funding acquisition, G.J.F. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the
manuscript.
Funding: This research was supported by grant awards from Fighting Blindness Ireland (FB Irl;
FB20DOC, FB16FAR, FB18CRE), the Health Research Board of Ireland (HRB; POR/2010/97) in
conjunction with Health Research Charities Ireland (HRCI; MRCG-2013-8, MRCG-2016-14), the Irish
Research Council (IRC; GOIPG/2017/1631) and Science Foundation Ireland (SFI; 16/1A/4452).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analyzed in this study. Data sharing is
not applicable to this article.
Acknowledgments: This review would not be possible without the approximate 25,000 patients
who have been discussed in this review. The authors would like to acknowledge the role that each
and every one of these individuals has played in advancing our collective knowledge of inherited
retinal conditions.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Dockery, A.; Stephenson, K.; Keegan, D.; Wynne, N.; Silvestri, G.; Humphries, P .; Kenna, P .F.; Carrigan, M.; Farrar, G.J. Target
5000: Target Capture Sequencing for Inherited Retinal Degenerations. Genes 2017 ,8, 304. [CrossRef]
2. Bernardis, I.; Chiesi, L.; Tenedini, E.; Artuso, L.; Percesepe, A.; Artusi, V .; Simone, M.L.; Manfredini, R.; Camparini, M.; Rinaldi, C.;
et al. Unravelling the Complexity of Inherited Retinal Dystrophies Molecular Testing: Added Value of Targeted Next-Generation
Sequencing. BioMed Res. Int. 2016 ,2016 , 1–14. [CrossRef]
3. Consugar, M.B.; Navarro-Gomez, D.; Place, E.M.; Bujakowska, K.M.; Sousa, M.E.; Fonseca-Kelly, Z.D.; Taub, D.; Janessian, M.;
Wang, D.Y.; Au, E.D.; et al. Panel-based genetic diagnostic testing for inherited eye diseases is highly accurate and reproducible,
and more sensitive for variant detection, than exome sequencing. Genet. Med. 2015 ,17, 253–261. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Ellingford, J.M.; Barton, S.; Bhaskar, S.; O’Sullivan, J.; Williams, S.; Lamb, J.; Panda, B.; Sergouniotis, P .; Gillespie, R.L.; Daiger, S.P .;
et al. Molecular ﬁndings from 537 individuals with inherited retinal disease. J. Med. Genet. 2016 ,53, 761–767. [CrossRef]Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 5684 13 of 20
5. Tiwari, A.; Bahr, A.; Bähr, L.; Fleischhauer, J.; Zinkernagel, M.S.; Winkler, N.; Barthelmes, D.; Berger, L.; Gerth-Kahlert, C.;
Neidhardt, J.; et al. Next generation sequencing based identiﬁcation of disease-associated mutations in Swiss patients with retinal
dystrophies. Sci. Rep. 2016 ,6, 28755. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Riera, M.; Navarro, R.; Ruiz-Nogales, S.; M éndez, P .; Bur és-Jelstrup, A.; Corc óstegui, B.; Pomares, E. Whole exome sequencing
using Ion Proton system enables reliable genetic diagnosis of inherited retinal dystrophies. Sci. Rep. 2017 ,7, 42078. [CrossRef]
7. Haer-Wigman, L.; Van Zelst-Stams, W.A.G.; Pfundt, R.; Born, L.I.V .D.; Klaver, C.C.W.; Verheij, J.B.G.M.; Hoyng, C.B.; Breuning,
M.H.; Boon, C.J.F.; Kievit, A.J.; et al. Diagnostic exome sequencing in 266 Dutch patients with visual impairment. Eur. J. Hum.
Genet. 2017 ,25, 591–599. [CrossRef]
8. Audo, I.; Bujakowska, K.M.; L éveillard, T.; Mohand-Saïd, S.; Lancelot, M.-E.; Germain, A.; Antonio, A.; Michiels, C.; Saraiva, J.-P .;
Letexier, M.; et al. Development and application of a next-generation-sequencing (NGS) approach to detect known and novel
gene defects underlying retinal diseases. Orphanet J. Rare Dis. 2012 ,7, 8. [CrossRef]
9. De Castro-Miro, M.; Tonda, R.; Escudero-Ferruz, P .; Andr és, R.; Mayor-Lorenzo, A.; Castro, J.; Ciccioli, M.; Hidalgo, D.A.;
Rodríguez-Ezcurra, J.J.; Farrando, J.; et al. Novel Candidate Genes and a Wide Spectrum of Structural and Point Mutations
Responsible for Inherited Retinal Dystrophies Revealed by Exome Sequencing. PLoS ONE 2016 ,11, e0168966. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
10. Neveling, K.; Collin, R.W.; Gilissen, C.; van Huet, R.A.; Visser, L.; Kwint, M.P .; Gijsen, S.J.; Zonneveld, M.N.; Wieskamp, N.;
de Ligt, J.; et al. Next-generation genetic testing for retinitis pigmentosa. Hum. Mutat. 2012 ,33, 963–972. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11. O’Sullivan, J.; Mullaney, B.G.; Bhaskar, S.S.; Dickerson, J.E.; Hall, G.; O’Grady, A.; Webster, A.; Ramsden, S.C.; Black, G.C.
A paradigm shift in the delivery of services for diagnosis of inherited retinal disease. J. Med. Genet. 2012 ,49, 322–326. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
12. Shanks, M.E.; Downes, S.M.; Copley, R.R.; Lise, S.; Broxholme, J.; Hudspith, K.A.; Kwasniewska, A.; Davies, W.I.; Hankins, M.W.;
Packham, E.R.; et al. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) as a diagnostic tool for retinal degeneration reveals a much higher
detection rate in early-onset disease. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 2012 ,21, 274–280. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Ge, Z.; Bowles, K.; Goetz, K.; Scholl, H.P .N.; Wang, F.; Wang, X.; Xu, S.; Wang, K.; Wang, H.; Chen, R. NGS-based Molecular
diagnosis of 105 eyeGENE®probands with Retinitis Pigmentosa. Sci. Rep. 2015 ,5, 18287. [CrossRef]
14. Zhao, L.; Wang, F.; Wang, H.; Li, Y.; Alexander, S.; Wang, K.; Willoughby, C.; Zaneveld, J.E.; Jiang, L.; Soens, Z.T.; et al. Next-
generation sequencing-based molecular diagnosis of 82 retinitis pigmentosa probands from Northern Ireland. Qual. Life Res.
2015 ,134, 217–230. [CrossRef]
15. Perez-Carro, R.; Corton, M.; S ánchez-Navarro, I.; Zurita, O.; Sanchez-Bolivar, N.; S ánchez-Alcudia, R.; Lelieveld, S.H.; Aller, E.;
Lopez-Martinez, M.A.; L ópez-Molina, M.I.; et al. Panel-based NGS Reveals Novel Pathogenic Mutations in Autosomal Recessive
Retinitis Pigmentosa. Sci. Rep. 2016 ,6, 19531. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Weisschuh, N.; Mayer, A.K.; Strom, T.M.; Kohl, S.; Glöckle, N.; Schubach, M.; Andreasson, S.; Bernd, A.; Birch, D.G.; Hamel, C.P .;
et al. Mutation Detection in Patients with Retinal Dystrophies Using Targeted Next Generation Sequencing. PLoS ONE 2016 ,11,
e0145951. [CrossRef]
17. Holtan, J.P .; Selmer, K.K.; Heimdal, K.R.; Bragad óttir, R. Inherited retinal disease in Norway—A characterization of current
clinical and genetic knowledge. Acta Ophthalmol. 2019 ,98, 286–295. [CrossRef]
18. 2020 World Population Data Sheet Shows Older Populations Growing, Total Fertility Rates Declining—Population Reference
Bureau. Available online: https://www.prb.org/2020-world-population-data-sheet/ (accessed on 12 January 2021).
19. RetNet. Retinal Information Network. Available online: https://sph.uth.edu/RetNet/ (accessed on 22 June 2018).
20. Tatour, Y.; Ben-Yosef, T. Syndromic Inherited Retinal Diseases: Genetic, Clinical and Diagnostic Aspects. Diagnostics 2020 ,10, 779.
[CrossRef]
21. Carrigan, M.; Duignan, E.; Humphries, P .; Palﬁ, A.; Kenna, P .F.; Farrar, G.J. A novel homozygous truncatingGNAT1mutation
implicated in retinal degeneration. Br. J. Ophthalmol. 2015 ,100, 495–500. [CrossRef]
22. Shankar, S.P .; Hughbanks-Wheaton, D.K.; Birch, D.G.; Sullivan, L.S.; Conneely, K.N.; Bowne, S.J.; Stone, E.M.; Daiger, S.P .
Autosomal Dominant Retinal Dystrophies Caused by a Founder Splice Site Mutation, c.828+3A>T, in PRPH2 and Protein
Haplotypes in trans as Modiﬁers. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2016 ,57, 349–359. [CrossRef]
23. Tee, J.J.L.; Smith, A.J.; Hardcastle, A.J.; Michaelides, M. RPGR-associated retinopathy: Clinical features, molecular genetics,
animal models and therapeutic options. Br. J. Ophthalmol. 2016 ,100, 1022–1027. [CrossRef]
24. Zupan, A.; Fakin, A.; Battelino, S.; Jarc-Vidmar, M.; Hawlina, M.; Bonnet, C.; Petit, C.; Glavaˇ c, D. Clinical and Haplotypic
Variability of Slovenian USH2A Patients Homozygous for the c. 11864G>A Nonsense Mutation. Genes 2019 ,10, 1015. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
25. Becker, T.; Pich, A.; Tamm, S.; Hedtfeld, S.; Ibrahim, M.; Altmüller, J.; Dalibor, N.; Toliat, M.R.; Janciauskiene, S.; Tümmler, B.; et al.
Genetic information from discordant sibling pairs points to ESRP2 as a candidate trans-acting regulator of the CF modiﬁer gene
SCNN1B. Sci. Rep. 2020 ,10, 1–19. [CrossRef]
26. Bandres-Ciga, S.; Center, T.A.G.; Saez-Atienzar, S.; Kim, J.J.; Makarious, M.B.; Faghri, F.; Diez-Fairen, M.; Iwaki, H.; Leonard,
H.; Botia, J.; et al. Large-scale pathway speciﬁc polygenic risk and transcriptomic community network analysis identiﬁes novel
functional pathways in Parkinson disease. Acta Neuropathol. 2020 ,140, 341–358. [CrossRef]Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 5684 14 of 20
27. Farrar, G.J.; Carrigan, M.; Dockery, A.; Millington-Ward, S.; Palﬁ, A.; Chadderton, N.; Humphries, M.; Kiang, A.S.; Kenna, P .F.;
Humphries, P . Toward an elucidation of the molecular genetics of inherited retinal degenerations. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2017 ,26,
R2–R11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28. Kortüm, F.; Kieninger, S.; Mazzola, P .; Kohl, S.; Wissinger, B.; Prokisch, H.; Stingl, K.; Weisschuh, N. X-Linked Retinitis Pigmentosa
Caused by Non-Canonical Splice Site Variants in RPGR .Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 850. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Verbakel, S.K.; Fadaie, Z.; Klevering, B.J.; Van Genderen, M.M.; Feenstra, I.; Cremers, F.P .M.; Hoyng, C.B.; Roosing, S. The identiﬁ-
cation of a RNA splice variant in TULP1 in two siblings with early-onset photoreceptor dystrophy. Mol. Genet. Genom. Med. 2019 ,
7, e660. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30. Al-Khuzaei, S.; Broadgate, S.; Halford, S.; Jolly, J.K.; Shanks, M.; Clouston, P .; Downes, S.M. Novel Pathogenic Sequence Variants
inNR2E3 and Clinical Findings in Three Patients. Genes 2020 ,11, 1288. [CrossRef]
31. Chen, Z.; Moran, K.; Richards-Yutz, J.; Toorens, E.; Gerhart, D.; Ganguly, T.; Shields, C.L.; Ganguly, A. Enhanced Sensitivity for
Detection of Low-Level Germline MosaicRB1Mutations in Sporadic Retinoblastoma Cases Using Deep Semiconductor Sequencing.
Hum. Mutat. 2014 ,35, 384–391. [CrossRef]
32. Strubbe, I.; Van Cauwenbergh, C.; De Zaeytijd, J.; De Jaegere, S.; De Bruyne, M.; Rosseel, T.; Van de Sompele, S.; De Baere, E.;
Leroy, B.P . Phenocopy of a heterozygous carrier of X-linked retinitis pigmentosa due to mosaicism for a RHO variant. Sci. Rep.
2021 ,11, 1–8. [CrossRef]
33. Dawod, P .G.A.; Jancic, J.; Marjanovic, A.; Brankovic, M.; Jankovic, M.; Samardzic, J.; Potkonjak, D.; Djuric, V .; Mesaros, S.;
Novakovic, I.; et al. Whole Mitochondrial Genome Analysis in Serbian Cases of Leber’s Hereditary Optic Neuropathy. Genes
2020 ,11, 1037. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Brusa, R.; Mauri, E.; Dell’Arti, L.; Magri, F.; Ronchi, D.; Minorini, V .; Mainetti, C.; Gagliardi, D.; Faravelli, I.; Meneri, M.; et al.
Expanding the clinical spectrum of the mitochondrial mutation A13084T in the ND5 gene. Neurol. Genet. 2020 ,6, e511. [CrossRef]
35. Vincent, A.L.; Abeysekera, N.; Van Bysterveldt, K.A.; Oliver, V .F.; Ellingford, J.M.; Barton, S.; Black, G.C. Next-generation
sequencing targeted disease panel in rod-cone retinal dystrophies in M ¯aori and Polynesian reveals novel changes and a common
founder mutation. Clin. Exp. Ophthalmol. 2017 ,45, 901–910. [CrossRef]
36. Numa, S.; Oishi, A.; Higasa, K.; Oishi, M.; Miyata, M.; Hasegawa, T.; Ikeda, H.O.; Otsuka, Y.; Matsuda, F.; Tsujikawa, A. EYS is a
major gene involved in retinitis pigmentosa in Japan: Genetic landscapes revealed by stepwise genetic screening. Sci. Rep. 2020 ,
10, 1–9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Sompele, S.V .D.; Smith, C.; Karali, M.; Corton, M.; Van Schil, K.; Peelman, F.; Cherry, T.; Rosseel, T.; Verdin, H.; Derolez, J.; et al.
Biallelic sequence and structural variants in RAX2 are a novel cause for autosomal recessive inherited retinal disease. Genet. Med.
2018 ,21, 1319–1329. [CrossRef]
38. Glen, W.B.; Peterseim, M.M.W.; Badilla, R.; Znoyko, I.; Bourg, A.; Wilson, R.; Hardiman, G.; Wolff, D.; Martinez, J. A high
prevalence of biallelic RPE65 mutations in Costa Rican children with Leber congenital amaurosis and early-onset retinal dystrophy.
Ophthalmic Genet. 2019 ,40, 110–117. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39. Avela, K.; Sankila, E.-M.; Seitsonen, S.; Kuuluvainen, L.; Barton, S.; Gillies, S.; Aittomäki, K. A founder mutation inCERKLis a
major cause of retinal dystrophy in Finland. Acta Ophthalmol. 2018 ,96, 183–191. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40. Avila-Fernandez, A.; Cort ón, M.; Nishiguchi, K.M.; Muñoz-Sanz, N.; Benavides-Mori, B.; Blanco-Kelly, F.; Riveiro-Alvarez, R.;
Garcia-Sandoval, B.; Rivolta, C.; Ayuso, C. Identiﬁcation of an RP1 Prevalent Founder Mutation and Related Phenotype in
Spanish Patients with Early-Onset Autosomal Recessive Retinitis. Ophthalmology 2012 ,119, 2616–2621. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41. Perea-Romero, I.; Gordo, G.; Iancu, I.F.; Del Pozo-Valero, M.; Almoguera, B.; Blanco-Kelly, F.; Carreño, E.; Jimenez-Rolando, B.;
Lopez-Rodriguez, R.; Lorda-Sanchez, I.; et al. Genetic landscape of 6089 inherited retinal dystrophies affected cases in Spain and
their therapeutic and extended epidemiological implications. Sci. Rep. 2021 ,11, 1–13. [CrossRef]
42. Tatour, Y.; Tamaiev, J.; Shamaly, S.; Colombo, R.; Bril, E.; Rabinowitz, T.; Yaakobi, A.; Mezer, E.; Leibu, R.; Tiosano, B.; et al.
A Novel Intronic Mutation of PDE6B Is a Major Cause of Autosomal Recessive Retinitis Pigmentosa among Caucasus Jews. Mol.
Vis.2019 ,25, 155–164. [PubMed]
43. Rehman, A.U.; Peter, V .G.; Quinodoz, M.; Rashid, A.; Khan, S.A.; Superti-Furga, A.; Rivolta, C. Exploring the Genetic Landscape
of Retinal Diseases in North-Western Pakistan Reveals a High Degree of Autozygosity and a Prevalent Founder Mutation in
ABCA4. Genes 2019 ,11, 12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Reiner, J.; Pisani, L.; Qiao, W.; Singh, R.; Yang, Y.; Shi, L.; Khan, W.A.; Sebra, R.; Cohen, N.; Babu, A.; et al. Cytogenomic
identiﬁcation and long-read single molecule real-time (SMRT) sequencing of a Bardet–Biedl Syndrome 9 (BBS9) deletion. NPJ
Genom. Med. 2018 ,3, 3. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45. Ostergaard, E.; Duno, M.; Batbayli, M.; Vilhelmsen, K.; Rosenberg, T. A Novel MERTK Deletion Is a Common Founder Muta-tion
in the Faroe Islands and Is Responsible for a High Proportion of Retinitis Pigmentosa Cases. Mol. Vis. 2011 ,17, 1485–1492.
46. Thompson, J.A.; De Roach, J.N.; McLaren, T.L.; Montgomery, H.E.; Hoffmann, L.H.; Campbell, I.R.; Chen, F.K.; Mackey, D.A.;
Lamey, T.M. The genetic proﬁle of Leber congenital amaurosis in an Australian cohort. Mol. Genet. Genom. Med. 2017 ,5, 652–667.
[CrossRef]
47. Motta, F.L.; Martin, R.P .; Filippelli-Silva, R.; Salles, M.V .; Sallum, J.M.F. Relative frequency of inherited retinal dystrophies in
Brazil. Sci. Rep. 2018 ,8, 1–9. [CrossRef]
48. Liu, X.; Tao, T.; Zhao, L.; Li, G.; Yang, L. Molecular diagnosis based on comprehensive genetic testing in 800 Chinese families with
non-syndromic inherited retinal dystrophies. Clin. Exp. Ophthalmol. 2021 ,49, 46–59. [CrossRef]Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 5684 15 of 20
49. Gao, F.-J.; Li, J.-K.; Chen, H.; Hu, F.-Y.; Zhang, S.-H.; Qi, Y.-H.; Xu, P .; Wang, D.-D.; Wang, L.-S.; Chang, Q.; et al. Genetic and
Clinical Findings in a Large Cohort of Chinese Patients with Suspected Retinitis Pigmentosa. Ophthalmology 2019 ,126, 1549–1556.
[CrossRef]
50. Liu, X.Z.; Li, Y.Y.; Yang, L.P . Comparison study of whole exome sequencing and targeted panel sequencing in molecular diagnosis
of inherited retinal dystrophies. Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao 2020 ,52, 836–844.
51. Huang, X.-F.; Mao, J.-Y.; Huang, Z.-Q.; Rao, F.-Q.; Cheng, F.-F.; Li, F.-F.; Wang, Q.-F.; Jin, Z.-B. Genome-Wide Detection of Copy
Number Variations in Unsolved Inherited Retinal Disease. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2017 ,58, 424–429. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52. Dan, H.; Huang, X.; Xing, Y.; Shen, Y. Application of targeted panel sequencing and whole exome sequencing for 76 Chinese
families with retinitis pigmentosa. Mol. Genet. Genom. Med. 2020 ,8, e1131. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53. Wang, L.; Zhang, J.; Chen, N.; Wang, L.; Zhang, F.; Ma, Z.; Li, G.; Yang, L. Application of Whole Exome and Targeted Panel
Sequencing in the Clinical Molecular Diagnosis of 319 Chinese Families with Inherited Retinal Dystrophy and Comparison Study.
Genes 2018 ,9, 360. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54. Avela, K.; Salonen-Kajander, R.; Laitinen, A.; Ramsden, S.; Barton, S.; Rudanko, S. The genetic aetiology of retinal degeneration in
children in Finland—New founder mutations identiﬁed. Acta Ophthalmol. 2019 ,97, 805–814. [CrossRef]
55. Weisschuh, N.; Obermaier, C.D.; Battke, F.; Bernd, A.; Kuehlewein, L.; Nasser, F.; Zobor, D.; Zrenner, E.; Weber, E.; Wissinger, B.;
et al. Genetic architecture of inherited retinal degeneration in Germany: A large cohort study from a single diagnostic center over
a 9-year period. Hum. Mutat. 2020 ,41, 1514–1527. [CrossRef]
56. Birtel, J.; Eisenberger, T.; Gliem, M.; Müller, P .L.; Herrmann, P .; Betz, C.; Zahnleiter, D.; Neuhaus, C.; Lenzner, S.; Holz, F.G.; et al.
Clinical and genetic characteristics of 251 consecutive patients with macular and cone/cone-rod dystrophy. Sci. Rep. 2018 ,8, 1–11.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
57. Tayebi, N.; Akinrinade, O.; Khan, M.I.; Hejazifar, A.; Dehghani, A.; Cremers, F.P .; Akhlaghi, M. Targeted next generation
sequencing reveals genetic defects underlying inherited retinal disease in Iranian families. Mol. Vis. 2019 ,25, 106–117. [PubMed]
58. Whelan, L.; Dockery, A.; Wynne, N.; Zhu, J.; Stephenson, K.; Silvestri, G.; Turner, J.; O’Byrne, J.J.; Carrigan, M.; Humphries, P .;
et al. Findings from a Genotyping Study of over 1000 People with Inherited Retinal Disorders in Ireland. Genes 2020 ,11, 105.
[CrossRef]
59. Sharon, D.; Ben-Yosef, T.; Cohen, N.G.; Pras, E.; Gradstein, L.; Soudry, S.; Mezer, E.; Zur, D.; Abbasi, A.H.; Zeitz, C.; et al.
A nationwide genetic analysis of inherited retinal diseases in Israel as assessed by the Israeli inherited retinal disease consortium
(IIRDC). Hum. Mutat. 2020 ,41, 140–149. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60. Koyanagi, Y.; Akiyama, M.; Nishiguchi, K.M.; Momozawa, Y.; Kamatani, Y.; Takata, S.; Inai, C.; Iwasaki, Y.; Kumano, M.;
Murakami, Y.; et al. Genetic characteristics of retinitis pigmentosa in 1204 Japanese patients. J. Med. Genet. 2019 ,56, 662–670.
[CrossRef]
61. Surl, D.; Shin, S.; Lee, S.-T.; Choi, J.R.; Lee, J.; Byeon, S.H.; Han, S.-H.; Lim, H.T.; Han, J. Copy Number Variations and Multiallelic
Variants in Korean Patients with Leber Congenital Amaurosis. Mol. Vis. 2020 ,26, 26–35.
62. Kim, M.S.; Joo, K.; Seong, M.-W.; Kim, M.J.; Park, K.H.; Park, S.S.; Woo, S.J. Genetic Mutation Proﬁles in Korean Patients with
Inherited Retinal Diseases. J. Korean Med. Sci. 2019 ,34, e161. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63. Zenteno, J.C.; Garc ía-Montaño, L.A.; Cruz-Aguilar, M.; Ronquillo, J.; Rodas-Serrano, A.; Aguilar-Castul, L.; Matsui, R.; Vencedor-
Meraz, C.I.; Arce-Gonz ález, R.; Graue-Wiechers, F.; et al. Extensive genic and allelic heterogeneity underlying inherited retinal
dystrophies in Mexican patients molecularly analyzed by next-generation sequencing. Mol. Genet. Genom. Med. 2019 ,8.
[CrossRef]
64. Wawrocka, A.; Skorczyk-Werner, A.; Wicher, K.; Niedziela, Z.; Ploski, R.; Rydzanicz, M.; Sykulski, M.; Kociecki, J.; Weisschuh, N.;
Kohl, S.; et al. Novel variants identiﬁed with next-generation sequencing in Polish patients with cone-rod dystrophy. Mol. Vis.
2018 ,24, 326–339.
65. Martin-Merida, I.; Avila-Fernandez, A.; Del Pozo-Valero, M.; Blanco-Kelly, F.; Zurita, O.; Perez-Carro, R.; Aguilera-Garcia, D.;
Riveiro-Alvarez, R.; Arteche, A.; Trujillo-Tiebas, M.J.; et al. Genomic Landscape of Sporadic Retinitis Pigmentosa. Ophthalmology
2019 ,126, 1181–1188. [CrossRef]
66. Gonz àlez-Duarte, R.; De Castro-Mir ó, M.; Tuson, M.; Ram írez-Castañeda, V .; Gils, R.V .; Marfany, G. Scaling New Heights in the
Genetic Diagnosis of Inherited Retinal Dystrophies. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 2019 ,1185 , 215–219. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67. Diñeiro, M.; Cap ín, R.; Cifuentes, G. Á.; Fern ández-Vega, B.; Villota, E.; Otero, A.; Santiago, A.; Pruneda, P .C.; Castillo, D.;
Viejo-D íaz, M.; et al. Comprehensive genomic diagnosis of inherited retinal and optical nerve disorders reveals hidden syndromes
and personalized therapeutic options. Acta Ophthalmol. 2020 ,98, e1034–e1048. [CrossRef]
68. Chen, Z.-J.; Lin, K.-H.; Lee, S.-H.; Shen, R.-J.; Feng, Z.-K.; Wang, X.-F.; Ms, X.H.; Huang, Z.-Q.; Jin, Z.-B. Mutation spectrum and
genotype-phenotype correlation of inherited retinal dystrophy in Taiwan. Clin. Exp. Ophthalmol. 2020 ,48, 486–499. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
69. Habibi, I.; Falfoul, Y.; Turki, A.; Hassairi, A.; El Matri, K.; Chebil, A.; Schorderet, D.F.; El Matri, L. Genetic spectrum of retinal
dystrophies in Tunisia. Sci. Rep. 2020 ,10, 10. [CrossRef]
70. Khan, A.O. Phenotype-guided genetic testing of pediatric inherited retinal disease in the United Arab Emirates. Retina 2019 ,40,
1829–1837. [CrossRef]Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 5684 16 of 20
71. Patel, N.; Alkuraya, H.; Alzahrani, S.S.; Nowailaty, S.; Seidahmed, M.Z.; Alhemidan, A.; Ben-Omran, T.; Ghazi, N.; Al-Aqeel, A.;
Al-Owain, M.; et al. Mutations in known disease genes account for the majority of autosomal recessive retinal dystrophies. Clin.
Genet. 2018 ,94, 554–563. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
72. Jiman, O.A.; Taylor, R.L.; Lenassi, E.; Smith, J.C.; Douzgou, S.; Ellingford, J.M.; Barton, S.; Hardcastle, C.; Fletcher, T.; Campbell,
C.; et al. Diagnostic yield of panel-based genetic testing in syndromic inherited retinal disease. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 2020 ,28,
576–586. [CrossRef]
73. Shah, M.; Shanks, M.; Packham, E.; Williams, J.; Haysmoore, J.; MacLaren, R.E.; N émeth, A.H.; Clouston, P .; Downes, S.M.
Next generation sequencing using phenotype-based panels for genetic testing in inherited retinal diseases. Ophthalmic Genet.
2020 ,41, 331–337. [CrossRef]
74. Carss, K.J.; Arno, G.; Erwood, M.; Stephens, J.; Sanchis-Juan, A.; Hull, S.; Megy, K.; Grozeva, D.; Dewhurst, E.; Malka, S.; et al.
Comprehensive rare variant analysis via whole-genome sequencing to determine the molecular pathology of inherited retinal
disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 2017 ,100, 75–90. [CrossRef]
75. Lenassi, E.; Clayton-Smith, J.; Douzgou, S.; Ramsden, S.C.; Ingram, S.; Hall, G.; Hardcastle, C.L.; Fletcher, T.A.; Taylor, R.L.;
Ellingford, J.M.; et al. Clinical utility of genetic testing in 201 preschool children with inherited eye disorders. Genet. Med. 2020 ,
22, 745–751. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76. Patel, A.; Hayward, J.D.; Tailor, V .; Nyanhete, R.; Ahlfors, H.; Gabriel, C.; Jannini, T.B.; Abbou-Rayyah, Y.; Henderson, R.; Nischal,
K.K.; et al. The Oculome Panel Test. Ophthalmology 2019 ,126, 888–907. [CrossRef]
77. Taylor, R.L.; Parry, N.R.; Barton, S.J.; Campbell, C.; Delaney, C.M.; Ellingford, J.M.; Hall, G.; Hardcastle, C.; Morarji, J.; Nichol, E.J.;
et al. Panel-Based Clinical Genetic Testing in 85 Children with Inherited Retinal Disease. Ophthalmology 2017 ,124, 985–991.
[CrossRef]
78. Goetz, K.E.; Reeves, M.J.; Gagadam, S.; Blain, D.; Bender, C.; Lwin, C.; Naik, A.; Tumminia, S.J.; Hufnagel, R.B. Genetic testing for
inherited eye conditions in over 6,000 individuals through the eyeGENE network. Am. J. Med. Genet. Part C Semin. Med. Genet.
2020 ,184, 828–837. [CrossRef]
79. Stone, E.M.; Andorf, J.L.; Whitmore, S.S.; DeLuca, A.P .; Giacalone, J.C.; Streb, L.M.; Braun, T.A.; Mullins, R.F.; Scheetz, T.E.;
Shefﬁeld, V .C.; et al. Clinically Focused Molecular Investigation of 1000 Consecutive Families with Inherited Retinal Disease.
Ophthalmology 2017 ,124, 1314–1331. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
80. Bryant, L.; Lozynska, O.; Maguire, A.M.; Aleman, T.S.; Bennett, J. Prescreening whole exome sequencing results from patients
with retinal degeneration for variants in genes associated with retinal degeneration. Clin. Ophthalmol. 2017 ,12, 49–63. [CrossRef]
81. Dillon, O.J.; Lunke, S.; Stark, Z.; Yeung, A.; Thorne, N.; Gaff, C.; White, S.M.; Tan, T.Y. Exome sequencing has higher diagnostic
yield compared to simulated disease-speciﬁc panels in children with suspected monogenic disorders. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 2018 ,26,
644–651. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82. Pontikos, N.; Arno, G.; Jurkute, N.; Schiff, E.; Ba-Abbad, R.; Malka, S.; Gimenez, A.; Georgiou, M.; Wright, G.; Armengol, M.; et al.
Genetic Basis of Inherited Retinal Disease in a Molecularly Characterized Cohort of More Than 3000 Families from the United
Kingdom. Ophthalmology 2020 ,127, 1384–1394. [CrossRef]
83. Hanany, M.; Sharon, D. Allele frequency analysis of variants reported to cause autosomal dominant inherited retinal diseases
question the involvement of 19% of genes and 10% of reported pathogenic variants. J. Med. Genet. 2019 ,56, 536–542. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
84. Dockery, A.; Carrigan, M.; Wynne, N.; Stephenson, K.; Keegan, D.; Kenna, P .F.; Farrar, G.J. A Novel FLVCR1 Variant Implicated in
Retinitis Pigmentosa. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 2019 ,1185 , 203–207. [CrossRef]
85. Jones, K.D.; Wheaton, D.K.; Bowne, S.J.; Sullivan, L.S.; Birch, D.G.; Chen, R.; Daiger, S.P . Next-generation sequencing to solve
complex inherited retinal dystrophy: A case series of multiple genes contributing to disease in extended families. Mol. Vis. 2017 ,
23, 470–481.
86. Birtel, J.; Gliem, M.; Hess, K.; Birtel, T.H.; Holz, F.G.; Zechner, U.; Bolz, H.J.; Herrmann, P . Comprehensive Geno- and Phenotyping
in a Complex Pedigree Including Four Different Inherited Retinal Dystrophies. Genes 2020 ,11, 137. [CrossRef]
87. Rodríguez-Muñoz, A.; Garc ía-Boh órquez, B.; Udaondo, P .; Herv ás-Ontiveros, A.; Salom, D.; Aller, E.; Jaijo, T.; Garc ía-Garc ía, G.;
Millán, J.M. Concomitant mutations in inherited retinal dystrophies. Retina 2021 . [CrossRef]
88. Lelieveld, S.H.; Spielmann, M.; Mundlos, S.; Veltman, J.; Gilissen, C. Comparison of Exome and Genome Sequencing Technologies
for the Complete Capture of Protein-Coding Regions. Hum. Mutat. 2015 ,36, 815–822. [CrossRef]
89. Schwarze, K.; Buchanan, J.; Taylor, J.C.; Wordsworth, S. Are whole-exome and whole-genome sequencing approaches cost-
effective? A systematic review of the literature. Genet. Med. 2018 ,20, 1122–1130. [CrossRef]
90. MassGenomics. Brace Yourself for Large-Scale Whole Genome Sequencing. Available online: http://massgenomics.org/2014/1
1/brace-yourself-for-large-scale-whole-genome-sequencing.html (accessed on 20 May 2021).
91. Approximate Sizes of Sequencing Run Output Folders. Available online: https://support.illumina.com/bulletins/2018/01/
approximate-sizes-of-sequencing-run-output-folders.html (accessed on 20 May 2021).
92. Strand NGS. Storage and Computation Requirements. Available online: https://www.strand-ngs.com/support/ngs-data-
storage-requirements (accessed on 20 May 2021).
93. CRAM Benchmarks. Available online: http://www.htslib.org/benchmarks/CRAM.html (accessed on 20 May 2021).
94. Krumm, N.; Hoffman, N. Practical estimation of cloud storage costs for clinical genomic data. Pract. Lab. Med. 2020 ,21, e00168.
[CrossRef]Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 5684 17 of 20
95. Tanjo, T.; Kawai, Y.; Tokunaga, K.; Ogasawara, O.; Nagasaki, M. Practical guide for managing large-scale human genome data in
research. J. Hum. Genet. 2021 ,66, 39–52. [CrossRef]
96. Hart, M.R.; Biesecker, B.B.; Blout, C.L.; Christensen, K.D.; Amendola, L.M.; Bergstrom, K.L.; Biswas, S.; Bowling, K.M.; Brothers,
K.B.; Conlin, L.K.; et al. Secondary ﬁndings from clinical genomic sequencing: Prevalence, patient perspectives, family history
assessment, and health-care costs from a multisite study. Genet. Med. 2019 ,21, 1100–1110. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
97. Green, R.C.; Berg, J.S.; Grody, W.W.; Kalia, S.S.; Korf, B.R.; Martin, C.L.; JD, A.L.M.; Nussbaum, R.L.; O’Daniel, J.M.; Ormond,
K.E.; et al. ACMG recommendations for reporting of incidental ﬁndings in clinical exome and genome sequencing. Genet. Med.
2013 ,15, 565–574. [CrossRef]
98. Kalia, S.S.; Adelman, K.; Bale, S.J.; Chung, W.K.; Eng, C.; Evans, J.P .; Herman, G.E.; Hufnagel, S.B.; Klein, T.E.; Korf, B.R.; et al.
Recommendations for reporting of secondary ﬁndings in clinical exome and genome sequencing, 2016 update (ACMG SF v2.0): A
policy statement of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics. Genet. Med. 2017 ,19, 249–255. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
99. Miller, D.T.; Lee, K.; Gordon, A.S.; Amendola, L.M.; Adelman, K.; Bale, S.J.; Chung, W.K.; Gollob, M.H.; Harrison, S.M.; Herman,
G.E.; et al. Recommendations for reporting of secondary ﬁndings in clinical exome and genome sequencing, 2021 update: A
policy statement of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG). Genet. Med. 2021 , 1–8. [CrossRef]
100. Miller, D.T.; Lee, K.; Chung, W.K.; Gordon, A.S.; Herman, G.E.; Klein, T.E.; Stewart, D.R.; Amendola, L.M.; Adelman, K.; Bale, S.J.;
et al. ACMG SF v3.0 list for reporting of secondary ﬁndings in clinical exome and genome sequencing: A policy statement of the
American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG). Genet. Med. 2021 , 1–10. [CrossRef]
101. Lionel, A.C.; Costain, G.; Monfared, N.; Walker, S.; Reuter, M.S.; Hosseini, S.M.; Thiruvahindrapuram, B.; Merico, D.; Jobling, R.;
Nalpathamkalam, T.; et al. Improved diagnostic yield compared with targeted gene sequencing panels suggests a role for
whole-genome sequencing as a ﬁrst-tier genetic test. Genet. Med. 2018 ,20, 435–443. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Zeitz, C.; Michiels, C.; Neuill é, M.; Friedburg, C.; Condroyer, C.; Boyard, F.; Antonio, A.; Bouzidi, N.; Milicevic, D.; Veaux, R.;
et al. Where are the missing gene defects in inherited retinal disorders? Intronic and synonymous variants contribute at least to
4% of CACNA1F -mediated inherited retinal disorders. Hum. Mutat. 2019 ,40, 765–787. [CrossRef]
103. Khan, M.; Cornelis, S.S.; Pozo-Valero, M.D.; Whelan, L.; Runhart, E.H.; Mishra, K.; Bults, F.; AlSwaiti, Y.; AlTalbishi, A.;
De Baere, E.; et al. Resolving the dark matter of ABCA4 for 1054 Stargardt disease probands through integrated genomics and
transcriptomics. Genet. Med. 2020 ,22, 1235–1246. [CrossRef]
104. Almomani, R.; Marchi, M.; Sopacua, M.; Lindsey, P .; Salvi, E.; De Koning, B.; Santoro, S.; Magri, S.; Smeets, H.J.M.; Boneschi, F.M.;
et al. Evaluation of molecular inversion probe versus TruSeq®custom methods for targeted next-generation sequencing. PLoS
ONE 2020 ,15, e0238467. [CrossRef]
105. Pozo, M.G.-D.; Mart ín-Sánchez, M.; Bravo-Gil, N.; M éndez-Vidal, C.; Chimenea, Á.; La R úa, E.R.-D.; Borrego, S.; Antiñolo,
G. Searching the second hit in patients with inherited retinal dystrophies and monoallelic variants in ABCA4, USH2A and
CEP290 by whole-gene targeted sequencing. Sci. Rep. 2018 ,8, 1–12. [CrossRef]
106. Vervoort, R.; Lennon, A.; Bird, A.C.; Tulloch, B.; Axton, R.; Miano, M.G.; Meindl, A.; Meitinger, T.; Ciccodicola, A.; Wright, A.F.
Mutational hot spot within a new RPGR exon in X-linked retinitis pigmentosa. Nat. Genet. 2000 ,25, 462–466. [CrossRef]
107. Di Iorio, V .; Karali, M.; Melillo, P .; Testa, F.; Brunetti-Pierri, R.; Musacchia, F.; Condroyer, C.; Neidhardt, J.; Audo, I.; Zeitz, C.; et al.
Spectrum of Disease Severity in Patients with X-Linked Retinitis Pigmentosa Due to RPGR Mutations. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis.
Sci.2020 ,61, 36. [CrossRef]
108. Chiang, J.P .W.; Lamey, T.M.; Wang, N.K.; Duan, J.; Zhou, W.; McLaren, T.L.; Thompson, J.A.; Ruddle, J.; De Roach, J.N.
Development of High-Throughput Clinical Testing ofRPGRORF15 Using a Large Inherited Retinal Dystrophy Cohort. Investig.
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2018 ,59, 4434–4440. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
109. Maggi, J.; Roberts, L.; Koller, S.; Rebello, G.; Berger, W.; Ramesar, R. De Novo Assembly-Based Analysis of RPGR Exon ORF15 in
an Indigenous African Cohort Overcomes Limitations of a Standard Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) Data Analysis Pipeline.
Genes 2020 ,11, 800. [CrossRef]
110. Deeb, S. The molecular basis of variation in human color vision. Clin. Genet. 2005 ,67, 369–377. [CrossRef]
111. Atilano, S.R.; Kenney, M.C.; Briscoe, A.D.; Jameson, K.A. A two-step method for identifying photopigment opsin and rhodopsin
gene sequences underlying human color vision phenotypes. Mol. Vis. 2020 ,26, 158–172.
112. Ueyama, H.; Li, Y.-H.; Fu, G.-L.; Lertrit, P .; Atchaneeyasakul, L.-O.; Oda, S.; Tanabe, S.; Nishida, Y.; Yamade, S.; Ohkubo, I.
An A-71C substitution in a green gene at the second position in the red/green visual-pigment gene array is associated with
deutan color-vision deﬁciency. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2003 ,100, 3357–3362. [CrossRef]
113. Katagiri, S.; Iwasa, M.; Hayashi, T.; Hosono, K.; Yamashita, T.; Kuniyoshi, K.; Ueno, S.; Kondo, M.; Ueyama, H.; Ogita, H.; et al.
Genotype determination of the OPN1LW/OPN1MW genes: Novel disease-causing mechanisms in Japanese patients h blue cone
monochromacy. Sci. Rep. 2018 ,8, 1–10. [CrossRef]
114. Yatsenko, S.; Bakos, H.; Vitullo, K.; Kedrov, M.; Kishore, A.; Jennings, B.; Surti, U.; Wood-Trageser, M.; Cercone, S.; Yatsenko, A.;
et al. High-resolution microarray analysis unravels complex Xq28 aberrations in patients and carriers affected by X-linked blue
cone monochromacy. Clin. Genet. 2015 ,89, 82–87. [CrossRef]
115. Wang, C.; Hosono, K.; Kachi, S.; Suto, K.; Nakamura, M.; Terasaki, H.; Miyake, Y.; Hotta, Y.; Minoshima, S. Novel
OPN1LW/OPN1MW deletion mutations in 2 Japanese families with blue cone monochromacy. Hum. Genome Var. 2016 ,3, 16011.
[CrossRef]Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 5684 18 of 20
116. Radziwon, A.; Arno, G.; Wheaton, D.K.; McDonagh, E.M.; Baple, E.L.; Webb-Jones, K.; Birch, D.G.; Webster, A.R.; Macdonald,
I.M. Single-base substitutions in the CHM promoter as a cause of choroideremia. Hum. Mutat. 2017 ,38, 704–715. [CrossRef]
117. Coppieters, F.; Todeschini, A.L.; Fujimaki, T.; Baert, A.; De Bruyne, M.; Van Cauwenbergh, C.; Verdin, H.; Bauwens, M.; Ongenaert,
M.; Kondo, M.; et al. Hidden Genetic Variation in LCA9-Associated Congenital Blindness Explained by 50UTR Mutations and
Copy-Number Variations of NMNAT1. Hum. Mutat. 2015 ,36, 1188–1196. [CrossRef]
118. Donato, L.; Scimone, C.; Rinaldi, C.; Aragona, P .; Briuglia, S.; D’Ascola, A.; D’Angelo, R.; Sidoti, A. Stargardt Phenotype
Associated with Two ELOVL4 Promoter Variants and ELOVL4 Downregulation: New Possible Perspective to Etiopathogenesis?
Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2018 ,59, 843–857. [CrossRef]
119. Van Schil, K.; Naessens, S.; Van De Sompele, S.; Carron, M.; Aslanidis, A.; Van Cauwenbergh, C.; Mayer, A.K.; Van Heetvelde,
M.; Bauwens, M.; Verdin, H.; et al. Mapping the genomic landscape of inherited retinal disease genes prioritizes genes prone to
coding and noncoding copy-number variations. Genet. Med. 2017 ,20, 202–213. [CrossRef]
120. Richards, S.; Aziz, N.; Bale, S.; Bick, D.; Das, S.; Gastier-Foster, J.; Grody, W.W.; Hegde, M.; Lyon, E.; Spector, E.; et al. Standards
and guidelines for the interpretation of sequence variants: A joint consensus recommendation of the American College of Medical
Genetics and Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology. Genet. Med. 2015 ,17, 405–423. [CrossRef]
121. Brandt, T.; Sack, L.M.; Arjona, D.; Tan, D.; Mei, H.; Cui, H.; Gao, H.; Bean, L.J.H.; Ankala, A.; Del Gaudio, D.; et al. Adapting
ACMG/AMP sequence variant classiﬁcation guidelines for single-gene copy-number variants. Genet. Med. 2019 ,22, 670–671,
Correction in 2020 ,22, 336–344. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
122. Li, H.-P .; Yuan, S.-Q.; Wang, X.-G.; Sheng, X.-L.; Li, X.-R. Myopia with X-linked retinitis pigmentosa results from a novel gross
deletion of RPGR gene. Int. J. Ophthalmol. 2020 ,13, 1306–1311. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
123. Buena-Atienza, E.; Nasser, F.; Kohl, S.; Wissinger, B. A 73,128 bp de novo deletion encompassing the OPN1LW/OPN1MW gene
cluster in sporadic Blue Cone Monochromacy: A case report. BMC Med. Genet. 2018 ,19, 107. [CrossRef]
124. De Bruijn, S.E.; Fiorentino, A.; Ottaviani, D.; Fanucchi, S.; Melo, U.S.; Corral-Serrano, J.C.; Mulders, T.; Georgiou, M.; Rivolta, C.;
Pontikos, N.; et al. Structural Variants Create New Topological-Associated Domains and Ectopic Retinal Enhancer-Gene Contact
in Dominant Retinitis Pigmentosa. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 2020 ,107, 802–814. [CrossRef]
125. Jones, K.D.; Radziwon, A.; Birch, D.G.; MacDonald, I.M. A novel SVA retrotransposon insertion in the CHM gene results in loss
of REP-1 causing choroideremia. Ophthalmic Genet. 2020 ,41, 341–344. [CrossRef]
126. Hurk, J.A.J.M.V .D.; Van De Pol, D.J.R.; Wissinger, B.; Van Driel, M.A.; Hoefsloot, L.H.; De Wijs, I.J.; Born, L.I.V .D.; Heckenlively,
J.R.; Brunner, H.G.; Zrenner, E.; et al. Novel types of mutation in the choroideremia (CHM) gene: A full-length L1 insertion and
an intronic mutation activating a cryptic exon. Qual. Life Res. 2003 ,113, 268–275. [CrossRef]
127. Hitti-Malin, R.J.; Burmeister, L.M.; Ricketts, S.L.; Lewis, T.W.; Pettitt, L.; Boursnell, M.; Schoﬁeld, E.C.; Sargan, D.; Mellersh, C.S.
A LINE-1 insertion situated in the promoter of IMPG2 is associated with autosomal recessive progressive retinal atrophy in Lhasa
Apso dogs. BMC Genet. 2020 ,21, 1–17. [CrossRef]
128. Tavares, E.; Tang, C.Y.; Vig, A.; Li, S.; Billingsley, G.; Sung, W.; Vincent, A.; Thiruvahindrapuram, B.; H éon, E. Retrotransposon
insertion as a novel mutational event in Bardet-Biedl syndrome. Mol. Genet. Genom. Med. 2018 ,7, e00521. [CrossRef]
129. Delvall ée, C.; Nicaise, S.; Antin, M.; Leuvrey, A.-S.; Nourisson, E.; Leitch, C.C.; Kellaris, G.; Stoetzel, C.; Geoffroy, V .; Scheidecker,
S.; et al. A BBS1 SVA F retrotransposon insertion is a frequent cause of Bardet-Biedl syndrome. Clin. Genet. 2020 , 13878. [CrossRef]
130. Ma, X.; Fan, J.; Wu, Y.; Zhao, S.; Zheng, X.; Sun, C.; Tan, L. Whole-genome de novo assemblies reveal extensive structural
variations and dynamic organelle-to-nucleus DNA transfers in African and Asian rice. Plant J. 2020 ,104, 596–612. [CrossRef]
131. Zampaglione, E.; Kinde, B.; Place, E.M.; Navarro-Gomez, D.; Ma, C.F.; Jamshidi, F.; Nassiri, S.; Mazzone, J.A.; Finn, C.; Schlegel,
D.; et al. Copy-number variation contributes 9% of pathogenicity in the inherited retinal degenerations. Genet. Med. 2020 ,22,
1079–1087. [CrossRef]
132. Bujakowska, K.M.; Fernandez-Godino, R.; Place, E.; Consugar, M.; Navarro-Gomez, D.; White, J.; Bedoukian, E.C.; Zhu, X.; Xie,
H.M.; Gai, X.; et al. Copy-number variation is an important contributor to the genetic causality of inherited retinal degenerations.
Genet. Med. 2016 ,19, 643–651. [CrossRef]
133. Ellingford, J.M.; Horn, B.; Campbell, C.; Arno, G.; Barton, S.; Tate, C.; Bhaskar, S.; Sergouniotis, P .I.; Taylor, R.L.; Carss, K.J.; et al.
Assessment of the incorporation of CNV surveillance into gene panel next-generation sequencing testing for inherited retinal
diseases. J. Med. Genet. 2017 ,55, 114–121. [CrossRef]
134. Dong, X.; Liu, B.; Yang, L.; Wang, H.; Wu, B.; Liu, R.; Chen, H.; Chen, X.; Yu, S.; Chen, B.; et al. Clinical exome sequencing as the
ﬁrst-tier test for diagnosing developmental disorders covering both CNV and SNV: A Chinese cohort. J. Med. Genet. 2020 ,57,
558–566. [CrossRef]
135. Sloan-Heggen, C.M.; Bierer, A.O.; Shearer, A.E.; Kolbe, D.L.; Nishimura, C.J.; Frees, K.L.; Ephraim, S.S.; Shibata, S.B.; Booth, K.T.;
Campbell, C.; et al. Comprehensive genetic testing in the clinical evaluation of 1119 patients with hearing loss. Qual. Life Res.
2016 ,135, 441–450. [CrossRef]
136. Sanchez-Navarro, I.; Da Silva, L.R.J.; Blanco-Kelly, F.; Zurita, O.; Sanchez-Bolivar, N.; Villaverde, C.; Lopez-Molina, M.I.; Garcia-
Sandoval, B.; Swaﬁri, S.T.S.; Minguez, P .; et al. Combining targeted panel-based resequencing and copy-number variation analysis
for the diagnosis of inherited syndromic retinopathies and associated ciliopathies. Sci. Rep. 2018 ,8, 1–11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
137. Goodwin, S.; McPherson, J.D.; McCombie, W.R. Coming of age: Ten years of next-generation sequencing technologies. Nat. Rev.
Genet. 2016 ,17, 333–351. [CrossRef]Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 5684 19 of 20
138. De Koning, A.P .J.; Gu, W.; Castoe, T.A.; Batzer, M.A.; Pollock, D.D. Repetitive Elements May Comprise Over Two-Thirds of the
Human Genome. PLoS Genet. 2011 ,7, e1002384. [CrossRef]
139. Chaisson, M.J.P .; Wilson, R.K.; Eichler, E.E. Genetic variation and the de novo assembly of human genomes. Nat. Rev. Genet. 2015 ,
16, 627–640. [CrossRef]
140. Mantere, T.; Kersten, S.; Hoischen, A. Long-Read Sequencing Emerging in Medical Genetics. Front. Genet. 2019 ,10, 426. [CrossRef]
141. Botton, M.R.; Yang, Y.; Scott, E.R.; Desnick, R.J.; Scott, S.A. Phased Haplotype Resolution of the SLC6A4 Promoter Using
Long-Read Single Molecule Real-Time (SMRT) Sequencing. Genes 2020 ,11, 1333. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
142. Sanchis-Juan, A.; Stephens, J.; French, C.E.; Gleadall, N.; M égy, K.; Penkett, C.; Shamardina, O.; Stirrups, K.; Delon, I.; Dewhurst,
E.; et al. Complex structural variants in Mendelian disorders: Identiﬁcation and breakpoint resolution using short- and long-read
genome sequencing. Genome Med. 2018 ,10, 1–10. [CrossRef]
143. Beales, P .L.; Badano, J.L.; Ross, A.J.; Ansley, S.J.; Hoskins, B.E.; Kirsten, B.; Mein, C.A.; Froguel, P .; Scambler, P .J.; Lewis, R.A.; et al.
Genetic Interaction of BBS1 Mutations with Alleles at Other BBS Loci Can Result in Non-Mendelian Bardet-Biedl Syndrome. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 2003 ,72, 1187–1199. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
144. Wheway, G.; Douglas, A.; Baralle, D.; Guillot, E. Mutation spectrum of PRPF31, genotype-phenotype correlation in retinitis
pigmentosa, and opportunities for therapy. Exp. Eye Res. 2020 ,192, 107950. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
145. Pormehr, L.A.; Ahmadian, S.; Daftarian, N.; Mousavi, S.A.; Shaﬁezadeh, M. PRPF31 reduction causes mis-splicing of the
phototransduction genes in human organotypic retinal culture. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 2019 ,28, 491–498. [CrossRef]
146. Yang, D.; Yao, Q.; Li, Y.; Xu, Y.; Wang, J.; Zhao, H.; Liu, F.; Zhang, Z.; Liu, Y.; Bie, X.; et al. A c.544_618del75bp mutation in
the splicing factor gene PRPF31 is involved in non-syndromic retinitis pigmentosa by reducing the level of mRNA expression.
Ophthalmic Physiol. Opt. 2020 ,40, 289–299. [CrossRef]
147. Rose, A.M.; Shah, A.Z.; Venturini, G.; Krishna, A.; Chakravarti, A.; Rivolta, C.; Bhattacharya, S.S. Transcriptional regulation of
PRPF31 gene expression by MSR1 repeat elements causes incomplete penetrance in retinitis pigmentosa. Sci. Rep. 2016 ,6, 19450.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
148. Green, D.J.; Sallah, S.R.; Ellingford, J.M.; Lovell, S.C.; Sergouniotis, P .I. Variability in Gene Expression is Associated with
Incomplete Penetrance in Inherited Eye Disorders. Genes 2020 ,11, 179. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
149. The Genome Aggregation Database. Available online: https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/ (accessed on 14 November 2019).
150. Sangermano, R.; Khan, M.; Cornelis, S.S.; Richelle, V .; Albert, S.; Garanto, A.; Elmelik, D.; Qamar, R.; Lugtenberg, D.; Born,
L.I.V .D.; et al. ABCA4 midigenes reveal the full splice spectrum of all reported noncanonical splice site variants in Stargardt
disease. Genome Res. 2017 ,28, 100–110. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
151. Di Scipio, M.; Tavares, E.; Deshmukh, S.; Audo, I.; Green-Sanderson, K.; Zubak, Y.; Zine-Eddine, F.; Pearson, A.; Vig, A.; Tang, C.Y.;
et al. Phenotype Driven Analysis of Whole Genome Sequencing Identiﬁes Deep Intronic Variants that Cause Retinal Dystrophies
by Aberrant Exonization. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2020 ,61, 36. [CrossRef]
152. Fadaie, Z.; Khan, M.; Del Pozo-Valero, M.; Cornelis, S.S.; Ayuso, C.; Cremers, F.P .M.; Roosing, S. Identiﬁcation of splice defects
due to noncanonical splice site or deep-intronic variants in ABCA4. Hum. Mutat. 2019 ,40, 2365–2376. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
153. Jonsson, F.; Westin, I.M.; Österman, L.; Sandgren, O.; Burstedt, M.; Holmberg, M.; Golovleva, I. ATP-binding cassette subfamily
A, member 4 intronic variants c.4773+3A>G and c.5461-10T>C cause Stargardt disease due to defective splicing. Acta Ophthalmol.
2018 ,96, 737–743. [CrossRef]
154. Vig, A.; Poulter, J.A.; Poulter, J.A.; Ottaviani, D.; Tavares, E.; Toropova, K.; Tracewska, A.M.; Mollica, A.; Kang, J.; Kehelwathugoda,
O.; et al. DYNC2H1 hypomorphic or retina-predominant variants cause nonsyndromic retinal degeneration. Genet. Med. 2020 ,22,
2041–2051. [CrossRef]
155. Brooks, M.J.; Chen, H.Y.; Kelley, R.A.; Mondal, A.K.; Nagashima, K.; De Val, N.; Li, T.; Chaitankar, V .; Swaroop, A. Improved
Retinal Organoid Differentiation by Modulating Signaling Pathways Revealed by Comparative Transcriptome Analyses with
Development In Vivo. Stem Cell Rep. 2019 ,13, 891–905. [CrossRef]
156. Cowan, A.S.; Renner, M.; De Gennaro, M.; Roma, G.; Nigsch, F.; Roska, B.; Cowan, C.S.; Gross-Scherf, B.; Goldblum, D.; Hou, Y.;
et al. Cell Types of the Human Retina and Its Organoids at Single-Cell Resolution. Cell2020 ,182. [CrossRef]
157. Fahim, A.T.; Sullivan, L.S.; Bowne, S.J.; Jones, K.D.; Wheaton, D.K.; Khan, N.W.; Heckenlively, J.R.; Jayasundera, K.T.; Branham,
K.H.; Andrews, C.A.; et al. X-Chromosome Inactivation Is a Biomarker of Clinical Severity in Female Carriers of RPGR-Associated
X-Linked Retinitis Pigmentosa. Ophthalmol. Retin. 2020 ,4, 510–520. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
158. Zhang, Q.; Giacalone, J.C.; Searby, C.; Stone, E.M.; Tucker, B.A.; Shefﬁeld, V .C. Disruption of RPGR protein interaction network is
the common feature of RPGR missense variations that cause XLRP . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2019 ,116, 1353–1360. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
159. Fahim, A.T.; Bowne, S.J.; Sullivan, L.S.; Webb, K.D.; Williams, J.T.; Wheaton, D.K.; Birch, D.G.; Daiger, S.P . Polymorphic variation
of RPGRIP1L and IQCB1 as modiﬁers of X-linked retinitis pigmentosa caused by mutations in RPGR. Single Mol. Single Cell Seq.
2011 ,723, 313–320. [CrossRef]
160. Li, Y.; Xia, X.; Paulus, Y.M. Advances in Retinal Optical Imaging. Photonics 2018 ,5, 9. [CrossRef]
161. Litts, K.M.; Woertz, E.N.; Georgiou, M.; Patterson, E.J.; Lam, B.L.; Fishman, G.A.; Pennesi, M.E.; Kay, C.N.; Hauswirth,
W.W.; Michaelides, M.; et al. Optical Coherence Tomography Artifacts Are Associated with Adaptive Optics Scanning Light
Ophthalmoscopy Success in Achromatopsia. Transl. Vis. Sci. Technol. 2021 ,10, 11. [CrossRef]Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 5684 20 of 20
162. Russakoff, D.B.; Lamin, A.; Oakley, J.D.; Dubis, A.M.; Sivaprasad, S. Deep Learning for Prediction of AMD Progression: A Pilot
Study. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2019 ,60, 712–722. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
163. Schmidt-Erfurth, U.; Waldstein, S.M.; Klimscha, S.; Sadeghipour, A.; Hu, X.; Gerendas, B.S.; Osborne, A.; Bogunovic, H. Prediction
of Individual Disease Conversion in Early AMD Using Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2018 ,59, 3199–3208.
[CrossRef]
164. Schmidt-Erfurth, U.; Bogunovic, H.; Sadeghipour, A.; Schlegl, T.; Langs, G.; Gerendas, B.S.; Osborne, A.; Waldstein, S.M. Machine
Learning to Analyze the Prognostic Value of Current Imaging Biomarkers in Neovascular Age-Related Macular Degeneration.
Ophthalmol. Retin. 2018 ,2, 24–30. [CrossRef]
165. Burlina, P .M.; Joshi, N.; Pacheco, K.D.; Freund, D.E.; Kong, J.; Bressler, N.M. Use of Deep Learning for Detailed Severity
Characterization and Estimation of 5-Year Risk Among Patients with Age-Related Macular Degeneration. JAMA Ophthalmol.
2018 ,136, 1359–1366. [CrossRef]
166. Burlina, P .; Joshi, N.; Pacheco, K.D.; Freund, D.E.; Kong, J.; Bressler, N.M. Utility of Deep Learning Methods for Referability
Classiﬁcation of Age-Related Macular Degeneration. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2018 ,136, 1305–1307. [CrossRef]
167. Grassmann, F.; Mengelkamp, J.; Brandl, C.; Harsch, S.; Zimmermann, M.E.; Linkohr, B.; Peters, A.; Heid, I.M.; Palm, C.; Weber,
B.H. A Deep Learning Algorithm for Prediction of Age-Related Eye Disease Study Severity Scale for Age-Related Macular
Degeneration from Color Fundus Photography. Ophthalmology 2018 ,125, 1410–1420. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
168. Goldhagen, B.E.; Al-Khersan, H. Diving Deep into Deep Learning: An Update on Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Retina. Curr. Ophthalmol.
Rep. 2020 ,8, 1–8. [CrossRef]
169. Peng, Y.; Dharssi, S.; Chen, Q.; Keenan, T.D.; Agr ón, E.; Wong, W.T.; Chew, E.Y.; Lu, Z. DeepSeeNet: A Deep Learning Model
for Automated Classiﬁcation of Patient-based Age-related Macular Degeneration Severity from Color Fundus Photographs.
Ophthalmology 2019 ,126, 565–575. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
170. Charng, J.; Xiao, D.; Mehdizadeh, M.; Attia, M.S.; Arunachalam, S.; Lamey, T.M.; Thompson, J.A.; McLaren, T.L.; De Roach, J.N.;
Mackey, D.A.; et al. Deep learning segmentation of hyperautoﬂuorescent ﬂeck lesions in Stargardt disease. Sci. Rep. 2020 ,10,
1–13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
171. Ha, A.; Sun, S.; Kim, Y.K.; Lee, J.; Jeoung, J.W.; Kim, H.C.; Park, K.H. Deep-learning-based enhanced optic-disc photography.
PLoS ONE 2020 ,15, e0239913. [CrossRef]
172. Galvin, O.; Chi, G.; Brady, L.; Hippert, C.; Rubido, M.D.V .; Daly, A.; Michaelides, M. The Impact of Inherited Retinal Diseases
in the Republic of Ireland (ROI) and the United Kingdom (UK) from a Cost-of-Illness Perspective. Clin. Ophthalmol. 2020 ,14,
707–719. [CrossRef]
173. McVeigh, E.; Jones, H.; Black, G.; Hall, G. The psychosocial and service delivery impact of genomic testing for inherited retinal
dystrophies. J. Community Genet. 2019 ,10, 425–434. [CrossRef]
174. Sabbaghi, H.; Daftarian, N.; Suri, F.; Mirrahimi, M.; Madani, S.; Sheikhtaheri, A.; Khorrami, F.; Saviz, P .; Nejad, M.Z.; Tivay, A.;
et al. The First Inherited Retinal Disease Registry in Iran: Research Protocol and Results of a Pilot Study. Arch. Iran. Med. 2020 ,23,
445–454. [CrossRef]
175. Marques, J.P .; Carvalho, A.L.; Henriques, J.; Murta, J.N.; Saraiva, J.; Silva, R. Design, development and deployment of a web-based
interoperable registry for inherited retinal dystrophies in Portugal: The IRD-PT. Orphanet J. Rare Dis. 2020 ,15, 1–13. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
176. Lejeune, C.; Amado, I.F. Valuing genetic and genomic testing in France: Current challenges and latest evidence. J. Community
Genet. 2021 , 1–9. [CrossRef]
177. Sergouniotis, P .I. Inherited Retinal Disorders: Using Evidence as a Driver for Implementation. Ophthalmology 2019 ,242, 187–194.
[CrossRef]