REPRODUCTIVE OPHTHALMOLOGY:
The Intersection of Inherited Eye Diseases and Reproductive Technologies
JONG G. PARK, MD*, CHRISTINE L. XU, BA*, ALLISON BOYD, MS, CGC†, LUSINE 
AGHAJANOVA, MD, PhD†, VINIT B. MAHAJAN, MD, PhD*, EDWARD H. WOOD, MD*
*Department of Ophthalmology, Byers Eye Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo 
Alto, California
†Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Stanford University School of Medicine, Sunnyvale, California.
Abstract
Purpose:  To propose a working framework for patients with inherited eye diseases presenting 
to ophthalmologists who are interested in assisted reproductive technology and preimplantation 
genetic testing.
Methods:  Retrospective chart review and case series of three families with inherited eye diseases 
who successfully underwent preimplantation genetic testing, in vitro fertilization, and birth of 
unaffected children.
Results:  Preimplantation genetic testing was performed for three families with different 
inherited eye diseases, which included autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa, autosomal 
recessive achromatopsia, and X-linked Goltz syndrome. Preimplantation genetic testing led to 
the identification of unaffected embryos, which were then selected for in vitro fertilization and 
resulted in the birth of unaffected children.
Conclusion:  A close collaboration between patients, families, ophthalmologists, reproductive 
genetic counselors, and reproductive endocrinology and infertility specialists is the ideal model for 
taking care of patients interested in preimplantation genetic testing for preventing the transmission 
of inherited eye diseases.
Keywords
assisted reproductive technologies; in vitro fertilization; inherited eye diseases; inherited retinal 
diseases; preimplantation genetic testing; reproductive endocrinology and infertility; reproductive 
ophthalmology
Inherited eye diseases (IED) are a heterogenous group of genetic conditions often associated 
with significant visual impairment.1 All inheritance patterns are represented in IEDs, and 
the vast majority are caused by a single gene abnormality marked by extensive genetic 
and phenotypic heterogeneity.2 Complex genetic phenomena that need to be accounted for 
Reprint requests: Edward H. Wood, MD, Department of Ophthalmology, Byers Eye Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
2452 Watson Court, Palo Alto, CA 94303; ehw@stanford.edu. 
None of the authors has any financial/conflicting interests to disclose.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Retina . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 October 23.
Published in final edited form as:
Retina . 2022 November 01; 42(11): 2025–2030. doi:10.1097/IAE.0000000000003591.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptwhen determining genetic causality include incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity 
resulting in nonlinearity between genotype and phenotype,1 uniparental disomy3 (where 
one receives two homologous chromosomes or chromosomal segments from one parent 
and no copy from the other parents), genetic mosaicism4 (where one has at least two or 
more cell populations with distinct genotypes derived from a single fertilized egg), copy 
number variations5 (where the number of copies of a gene may vary as a result of deletions, 
inversions, and duplications), and gene–environmental epigenetic changes including DNA 
methylation, histone modifications, chromatin remodeling, and noncoding RNA-associated 
gene regulations.6
A predominant type of IED is inherited retinal disease (IRD) with currently more than 
260 causative genes identified and novel disease genes continuously being discovered.7 For 
IRDs alone, panel-based genetic testing is able to identify the genetic cause of disease for 
approximately 67% of all patients with IRDs and up to 85% of children with IRDs.7 As 
of 2020, roughly 5.5 million individuals (~1 in 1,380) are expected to be affected by an 
autosomal recessive (AR)-IRD, and 2.7 billion individuals worldwide (36% of the global 
population) are carriers of an IRD-causing mutation, a prevalence that is likely the highest 
across any group of human mendelian conditions.8 One free option for IRD testing is 
through Invitae (San Francisco, CA) and Spark Therapeutics (Philadelphia, PA).
The current management of IEDs is limited. To date, there is only one FDA approved gene-
based therapy of IEDs: voretigene neparvovec-ryzl (Luxturna)9 for individuals with Leber 
congenital amaurosis and AR retinitis pigmentosa secondary to biallelic mutations in the 
RPE65  gene. Luxturna for RPE65 -mediated IRD, although revolutionary, comes with a cost 
of approximately $850,000 USD for both eyes.10 Cost–benefit analyses examining Luxturna 
have yielded varying results likely because of variations in modeling methodology.10
Additional therapies being investigated for IEDs include gene augmentation and gene 
editing approaches for other mutations, optogenetics, cell-based therapies, retinal prosthetic 
devices,11 and neuroprotective therapies such as N-acetylcysteine, ciliary neurotrophic 
factor, and rod-derived cone viability factor.7,12 There are no current therapeutics approved 
in the United States for mitochondrial disease.
Reproductive technologies play a significant role in many other fields of medicine to help 
couples with family planning, fertility preservation, and fertility treatment in the setting of 
an inherited disorder. However, a formal approach toward the prevention of IEDs has not 
yet been standardized within the field of ophthalmology. Couples often initially approach 
reproductive endocrinology and infertility (REI) specialists after 1) experiencing difficulty 
with conception, 2) having a child diagnosed with an inherited genetic disease and inquiring 
about potential options for future unaffected children, and/or 3) having self-identified as 
affected by disease or as carrier(s) for an AR disease through genetic carrier screening 
panels, which are recommended for all individuals before or during pregnancy.
Those at risk of having a child with an inherited genetic disease have the option to 
undergo in vitro fertilization (IVF) with preimplantation genetic testing for aneuploidy 
(PGT-A) or preimplantation genetic testing for monogenic disorders (PGT-M, previously PARK et al. Page 2
Retina . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 October 23.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptknown as preimplantation genetic diagnosis, or preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD)), 
to reduce the likelihood that their child is affected.13,14 In vitro fertilization involves 
ovarian stimulation using exogenous gonadotropins such as follicle-stimulating hormone 
and luteinizing hormone to achieve multifollicular development, oocyte retrieval using 
ultrasound-guided transvaginal aspiration, and embryo creation through combining eggs and 
sperm in a dish or with intracytoplasmic sperm injection. The fertilized egg (embryo) is then 
cultured in vitro for two to six days until the embryo is transferred into the uterus using 
transabdominal ultrasound guidance. Commonly now-adays, the embryos are cultured for 5 
days to 6 days, and at that developmental stage are called blastocysts. At this point, some 
couples may request genetic embryo testing, which requires embryo biopsy with subsequent 
embryo freezing and PGT-A or PGT-M procedures. Because of its high success rate in the 
recent years, IVF has been used very frequently, with approximately 2% of all babies in 
the US being born after IVF,15 and preimplantation genetic testing (PGT) being used (as of 
2018) in roughly 50% of all retrieval cycles.16
In this manuscript, we will review several case studies involving patients with IEDs that 
exemplify how assisted reproductive technologies (ART) can be harnessed to offer patients 
different options for managing their IEDs. This approach is not limited to these specific 
IEDs, but can be applied to most IEDs with causative, known genetic mutations. In doing so, 
we also provide a practical template about how ophthalmologists can collaborate with REI 
specialists to best serve patients who are interested in preimplantation genetic testing and 
reproductive planning for IEDs.
Methods
This study was a literature review and retrospective chart review conducted at Stanford 
University and adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. institutional review 
board (IRB)/Ethics Committee ruled that approval was not required for this study. 
Medical records of patients with IEDs identified through the Reproductive Endocrinology 
and Infertility clinic at Stanford and Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital were accessed 
in a Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPPA) compliant fashion 
and reported with de-identified information. A literature review was conducted on 
PubMed for previous work conducted in the field of IEDs and reproductive medicine in 
collaboration with ophthalmology, including the field of “antenatal ophthalmology17” and 
“preimplantation genetic diagnosis for eye disease,18” which have been defined previously. 
A PubMed search using the terms “reproductive ophthalmology” did not return any results.
Results
The complex and dynamic genetic landscape underlying IEDs contributes toward their 
difficulty in diagnosis and treatment. Although not all cases will be this straightforward, here 
we present three cases of inherited eye disease with classic mendelian inheritance patterns 
managed with reproductive technologies.PARK et al. Page 3
Retina . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 October 23.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptAutosomal Dominant Inherited Eye Diseases
Autosomal dominant (AD) disease is characterized by the presence of a single heterozygous 
pathogenic variant affecting one allele on one of the 22 autosomes. Both sexes are equally 
affected, and typically a family history will be present. One of the most common genetic eye 
disorders with an AD inheritance is AD-retinitis pigmentosa.19
Autosomal dominant case study— Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a genetically and 
clinically heterogeneous group of IRDs with a prevalence of roughly one in 4,000 
individuals.19 Of all RP cases, 25% to 30% are AD. Autosomal dominant retinitis 
pigmentosa (AD-RP) causes night blindness and progressive visual field loss, which occurs 
because of predominant rod degeneration and subsequent cone and RPE degeneration.20
A 30-year-old woman with a strong maternal family history of RP and a diagnosis of 
RP (legally blind) at the age of six initially presented to our ophthalmology clinic with 
a desire to obtain further genetic testing in anticipation of future family planning. She 
had classic findings of optic nerve pallor, attenuated retinal vessels, and pigmented bone 
spicules in the retinal periphery with severe visual field constriction. We obtained genetic 
testing, which revealed a mutation ( p.L523P) in the KIF3B  gene associated with AD RP. She 
then proceeded with reproductive genetic counseling and IVF at the Stanford Reproductive 
Endocrinology and Infertility clinic. Ten blastocysts developed from one IVF cycle, and 
blastocyst biopsy revealed that three were euploid and unaffected. She and her husband 
decided to have a frozen embryo transfer of one of these unaffected embryos. Confirmatory 
chorionic villus sampling (biopsy of the placenta) was performed during the first trimester 
of pregnancy, confirming absence of the RP mutation in the fetus. This led to the successful 
birth of an unaffected healthy baby girl. She and her husband are considering undergoing 
another frozen embryo transfer with an unaffected embryo in the future, because they hope 
to have at least two children.
Autosomal Recessive Inherited Eye Diseases
Autosomal recessive disease is characterized by the presence of mutations affecting both 
copies of a gene residing on one of 22 autosomal chromosomes, leading to disease. With 
only one mutated copy, patients are typically clinically unaffected, and both sexes are 
equally involved. Parents are often unaffected, but there are exceptions where a parent has 
symptoms related to their mutation status.
Autosomal recessive case study— Achromatopsia is an AR disease that causes retinal 
cone dysfunction and symptoms of impaired color vision, nystagmus, and decreased 
visual acuity.21 Implicated genes in achromatopsia include CNGB3  and CNGA3 , which 
encode cyclic nucleotide-gated channels located on the outer segment cell membranes of 
photoreceptors that play a crucial role in phototransduction.22,23
A 34-year-old female patient presented to Stanford Reproductive Health clinic interested in 
embryo cryopreservation. She and her husband had been previously identified as carriers 
for achromatopsia because of heterozygous pathogenic mutations in the gene CNGB3 , and 
requested the preimplantation genetic testing to analyze the probability of their children PARK et al. Page 4
Retina . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 October 23.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptbeing affected by achromatopsia. She underwent counseling with our reproductive genetic 
counselor, followed by three rounds of oocyte retrieval and PGT-M. From all three cycles 
of IVF with PGT-M, 22 blastocysts were analyzed, and the ones that were viable for 
transfer back to the patient were as follows: two carrier males, one unaffected male, one 
unaffected female, and one carrier female. The couple is now proceeding with a transfer of 
the unaffected male blastocyst.
X-Linked Inherited Eye Diseases
X-linked disease is characterized by a pathogenic variant on an X (sex) chromosome. In 
X-linked recessive conditions, men are affected significantly more than women, but women 
may be affected because of variable X-chromosome inactivation (lyonization). One common 
IED with this inheritance pattern is congenital X-linked retinoschisis secondary to mutations 
in RS1.24
In X-linked dominant conditions, the female’s healthy X chromosome does not readily 
compensate for the mutation; therefore, women and men can be affected. However, men 
often display a more severe phenotype, and the mutations are sometimes lethal early in life. 
Eye disorders with X-linked dominant inheritance include incontinentia pigmenti,25 Aicardi 
syndrome,26 and Goltz syndrome.27
X-linked case study— Goltz syndrome, also known as Focal Dermal Hypoplasia, is an X-
linked dominant syndrome caused by mutations in the PORCN  gene.27,28 Ophthalmologic 
manifestations include chorioretinal colobomas, iris colobomas, nystagmus, strabismus, 
microphthalmia, anophthalmia, cataracts, and conjunctival and eyelid papillomas.28
A 33-year-old woman with a known history of Goltz syndrome with a history of focal 
dermal hyperplasia, squamous papillomas, and recurrent sinusitis was referred to Stanford 
reproductive health clinic from an outside clinic. She underwent one IVF cycle, nine 
blastocysts were biopsied, and PGT-M indicated that four were euploid and negative for 
Goltz syndrome. She and her husband decided to proceed with frozen embryo transfer of 
one of the four unaffected embryos. This led to the successful conception and delivery of an 
unaffected baby boy, a strong indication of the child being unaffected because this X-linked 
dominant condition would have been likely lethal to the male embryo. The boy was also 
tested postnatally to confirm the absence of the mutation. The patient and her husband are 
planning to have another frozen embryo transfer in the near future in the hopes of having 
another unaffected child.
Discussion
Managing IEDs with ART through collaborations between ophthalmology and REI 
specialists is not a novel practice.29-31 The American Academy of Ophthalmology also 
released a seminal report about when and how to recommend genetic testing for IEDs.32 
The Academy’s report included recommendations to offer genetic testing for patients with 
Mendelian disorders with causative genes that have been identified, to ensure genetic 
counseling from a physician or genetic counselor for these patients, to avoid direct-to-
consumer testing, and to avoid testing for genetically complex disorders and untreatable PARK et al. Page 5
Retina . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 October 23.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptdisorders.32 However, uncertainty remains for how a multidisciplinary team (involving 
families, ophthalmologists, REI specialists, and genetic counselors) can practically approach 
this field in a collaborative fashion. Herein, we have outlined the rationale for this 
collaboration and provided examples of “reproductive ophthalmology” to demystify the 
process, increase utilization of available resources, decrease overall health care costs, and 
most of all, prevent  the occurrence of vision loss.
The workflow we recommended begins with the ophthalmologist, who refers qualified 
patient(s) to a trained reproductive genetic counselor, who ultimately refers qualified 
patient(s) to an REI specialist to perform IVF with PGT (Figure 1). The ophthalmologist 
would ideally have some basic understanding of IEDs and ART as outlined in this 
manuscript to gauge the patient’s general interest in the process; if not, we recommend 
referring to a colleague who has more experience in this area. In this recommended 
workflow, it is the responsibility of the ophthalmologist to perform genetic2 and ancillary 
diagnostic testing, including evaluation of family members when applicable. Variants of 
uncertain significance and uncertain genotype–phenotype associations will need to be 
analyzed carefully by the ophthalmologist’s genetic team. Having a high level of rigor 
in genotype–phenotype correlation is especially important today with the popularity of 
commercially available gene screening tests for this complex group of diseases to avoid false 
discovery rates and improper counseling.
The ideal deliverable from ophthalmologist to reproductive genetic counselor is a pedigree 
annotated with corroborating genetic and clinical findings. Fertility clinics can be found 
through referrals by local obstetricians and gynecologists, through the Society for Assisted 
Reproductive Technology online tool: https://www.sartcorsonline.com/members/Search , 
or through the Centers for Disease Control online tool: https://www.cdc.gov/art/artdata/
index.html . Another helpful resource for clinicians and patients is the National Institute 
of Health (NIH) Genetic Eye Disease Database: https://rarediseases.info.nih.gov/diseases/
diseases-by-category/9/eye-diseases .
At the next stage of the process, the ophthalmologist gives the information discussed 
above to a reproductive, prenatal, or infertility genetic counselor, who can discuss in detail 
reproductive options including technical limitations, and ethical and financial considerations. 
Finally, if patients or families are interested and are qualified candidates for PGT, the genetic 
counselor then refers them to an REI specialist to perform PGT, which combines two 
primary techniques: 1) IVF and 2) embryo genetic testing. Based on the results of embryo 
genetic testing, one low risk embryo is implanted at a time through standard IVF procedure, 
ideally resulting in the birth of an unaffected child. The current total cost of one complete 
cycle with PGT-M is approximately $20,000 to 30,000 USD, which may be variably covered 
by insurance and can often be justified with letters to the insurance company from the 
patient’s primary care physician.
Patients may alternatively enter the “reproductive ophthalmology” workflow by directly 
scheduling an appointment with an REI specialist after 1) experiencing difficulty with 
conception, 2) having a child diagnosed with an inherited genetic disease and inquiring 
about potential options for future unaffected children, or 3) having self-identified as affected PARK et al. Page 6
Retina . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 October 23.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptby disease or as carrier(s) for disease through genetic carrier screening. The REI specialist 
can then refer the patient to reproductive genetics and ophthalmology to assess genotype–
phenotype correlation and reproductive risks as needed.
Conclusions
Reproductive ophthalmology is an emerging collaborative field between REI specialists, 
reproductive genetic counselors, and ophthalmologists. Reproductive ophthalmology has the 
potential to play a significant role for couples with IEDs who want to conceive an unaffected 
child. Where gene therapy approaches are currently not often efficacious for AD, X-linked 
dominant, or mitochondrial-DNA-based conditions, the use of ART for ophthalmology is 
particularly exciting for families with IEDs (with or without affected children), because it 
can lead to the birth of an unaffected child, regardless of the inheritance type.
Because of the fact that the prevalence of carriers of an IRD-causing mutation is likely 
the highest across any group of human mendelian conditions (2.7 billion worldwide, ~1/3 
of global population),4 the significant economic impact of IED (IRDs alone cost the 
United States $31 billion USD per year), and the emerging popularity of ART (2% of all 
babies are currently born via IVF14), “reproductive ophthalmology” may represent a more 
cost-effective approach compared with current treatment options for these patients. This is 
especially true considering the implications of preventing disease transmission in sequential 
family lineages.
We conclude by mentioning that there are many challenging ethical considerations for all 
providers involved in ART and reproductive health. Although a full discussion of the ethics 
of reproductive technology is beyond the scope of this study, patients from different cultures, 
ethnicities, religions, and socioeconomic backgrounds will hold widely disparate beliefs 
about reproductive technology, and these beliefs must be respected. All members of the care 
team must be keenly aware of these factors and understand that there is not one approach 
that will be appropriate for every patient and family. It is important to note that this approach 
is not intended to “design” children with certain traits, because this is not currently possible 
even if there was parental desire to do so, but to prevent known and debilitating disease 
when the family expresses interest. We recommend having honest open-ended discussions 
designed to empower each individual patient and family member to make their decisions 
based on their own ethical, moral, and cultural values.
Acknowledgments
Supported by an unrestricted grant from Research to Prevent Blindness and NEI P30EY026877. The sponsor or 
funding organization had no role in the design or conduct of this research.
References
1. Green DJ, Sallah SR, Ellingford JM, et al. Variability in gene expression is associated with 
incomplete penetrance in inherited eye disorders. Genes 2020;11:E179.
2. Wood EH, Hariprasad SM, Drenser KA. Genetic testing for retina specialists. Ophthalmic Surg 
Lasers Imaging Retina 2018;49:292–295. [PubMed: 29772038] PARK et al. Page 7
Retina . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 October 23.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript3. Rivolta C, Berson EL, Dryja TP. Paternal uniparental heterodisomy with partial isodisomy of 
chromosome 1 in a patient with retinitis pigmentosa without hearing loss and a missense mutation 
in the Usher syndrome type II gene USH2A. Arch Ophthalmol 2002;120:1566–1571. [PubMed: 
12427073] 
4. Martínez-Glez V , Tenorio J, Nevado J, et al. A six-attribute classification of genetic mosaicism. 
Genet Med 2020;22:1743–1757. [PubMed: 32661356] 
5. Huang XF, Mao JY , Huang ZQ, et al. Genome-wide detection of copy number variations in unsolved 
inherited retinal disease. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2017;58:424–429. [PubMed: 28118666] 
6. Alkozi HA, Franco R, Pintor JJ. Epigenetics in the eye: an overview of the most relevant ocular 
diseases. Front Genet 2017;8:144. [PubMed: 29075285] 
7. Duncan JL, Pierce EA, Laster AM, et al. Inherited retinal degenerations: current landscape and 
knowledge gaps. Translational Vis Sci Technol 2018;7:6.
8. Hanany M, Rivolta C, Sharon D. Worldwide carrier frequency and genetic prevalence of autosomal 
recessive inherited retinal diseases. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2020;117:2710–2716. [PubMed: 
31964843] 
9. Maguire AM, Russell S, Wellman JA, et al. Efficacy, safety, and durability of voretigene 
neparvovec-rzyl in RPE65 mutation-associated inherited retinal dystrophy: results of phase 1 and 3 
trials. Ophthalmology 2019;126:1273–1285. [PubMed: 31443789] 
10. Yannuzzi NA, Smiddy WE. Cost-effectiveness of voretigene neparvovec-rzyl therapy. JAMA 
Ophthalmol 2019;137:1123–1124. [PubMed: 31318388] 
11. Ho AC, Humayun MS, Dorn JD, et al. Long-term results from an epiretinal prosthesis to restore 
sight to the blind. Ophthalmology 2015;122:1547–1554. [PubMed: 26162233] 
12. Wood EH, Tang PH, De la Huerta I, et al. Stem cell therapies, gene-based therapies, optogenetics, 
and retinal prosthetics: current state and implications for the future. Retina 2019;39:820–835. 
[PubMed: 30664120] 
13. Preimplantation genetic testing: ACOG committee opinion, number 799. Obstet Gynecol 
2020;135:e133–e137. [PubMed: 32080053] 
14. Sullivan-Pyke C, Dokras A. Preimplantation genetic screening and preimplantation genetic 
diagnosis. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 2018;45:113–125. [PubMed: 29428279] 
15. Kovacs G, ed. How to Improve Your ART Success Rates: An Evidence-Based Review of Adjuncts 
to IVF. New York: Cambridge University Press; 2011.
16. Hipp HS, Crawford S, Boulet S, et al. Trends and outcomes for preimplantation genetic testing in 
the United States, 2014-2018. JAMA 2022;327:1288–1290. [PubMed: 35380591] 
17. Lehman SS. Antenatal ophthalmology. J AAPOS 2003;7:428–429. [PubMed: 14730298] 
18. Schofield D, Zeppel MJB, Staffieri S, et al. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis for retinoblastoma 
survivors: a cost-effectiveness study. Reprod Biomed Soc Online 2020;10:37–45. [PubMed: 
32577540] 
19. Daiger SP, Bowne SJ, Sullivan LS. Genes and mutations causing autosomal dominant retinitis 
pigmentosa. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2014;5(10):a017129. [PubMed: 25304133] 
20. Coussa RG, Chakarova C, Ajlan R, et al. Genotype and phenotype studies in autosomal dominant 
retinitis pigmentosa (adRP) of the French Canadian founder population. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 
2015;56:8297–8305. [PubMed: 26720483] 
21. Hirji N, Aboshiha J, Georgiou M, et al. Achromatopsia: clinical features, molecular 
genetics, animal models and therapeutic options. Ophthalmic Genet 2018;39:149–157. [PubMed: 
29303385] 
22. Kohl S, Varsanyi B, Antunes GA, et al. CNGB3 mutations account for 50% of all cases with 
autosomal recessive achromatopsia. Eur J Hum Genet 2005;13:302–308. [PubMed: 15657609] 
23. Kohl S, Marx T, Giddings I, et al. Total colourblindness is caused by mutations in the gene 
encoding the alpha-subunit of the cone photoreceptor cGMP-gated cation channel. Nat Genet 
1998;19:257–259. [PubMed: 9662398] 
24. Wood EH, Lertjirachai I, Ghiam BK, et al. The natural history of congenital X-linked retinoschisis 
and conversion between phenotypes over time. Ophthalmol Retina 2019;3:77–82. [PubMed: 
30935660] PARK et al. Page 8
Retina . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 October 23.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript25. Swinney CC, Han DP, Karth PA. Incontinentia Pigmenti: a comprehensive review and update. 
Ophthalmic Surg Lasers Imaging Retina 2015;46:650–657. [PubMed: 26114846] 
26. Al-Moujahed A, Callaway NF, Ludwig CA, et al. Morning glory optic nerve in Aicardi syndrome: 
report of a case with fluorescein angiography. Eur J Ophthalmol 2020;16:1120672120942702.
27. Warburg M Focal dermal hypoplasia. Ocular and general manifestations with a survey of the 
literature. Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh) 1970;48:525–536. [PubMed: 4990274] 
28. Gisseman JD, Herce HH. Ophthalmologic manifestations of focal dermal hypoplasia (Goltz 
syndrome): a case series of 18 patients. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet 2016;172C:59–63. 
[PubMed: 27001926] 
29. Huang X, Liu Y , Yu X, et al. The clinical application of preimplantation genetic diagnosis for 
X-linked retinitis pigmentosa. J Assist Reprod Genet 2019;36:989–994. [PubMed: 30887160] 
30. Sohrab MA, Allikmets R, Guarnaccia MM, Smith RT. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis for 
stargardt disease. Am J Ophthalmol 2010;149:651–655. [PubMed: 20149343] 
31. Méjécase C, Malka S, Guan Z, et al. Practical guide to genetic screening for inherited eye diseases. 
Ther Adv Ophthalmol 2020;12:2515841420954592. [PubMed: 33015543] 
32. Stone EM, Aldave AJ, Drack A V , et al. Recommendations for genetic testing of inherited eye 
diseases: report of the American Academy of Ophthalmology task force on genetic testing. 
Ophthalmology 2012;119:2408–2410. [PubMed: 22944025] PARK et al. Page 9
Retina . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 October 23.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFig. 1. 
Framework for preimplantation genetic testing using a collaborative approach between 
ophthalmology and reproductive endocrinology and infertility for patients with IEDs.PARK et al. Page 10
Retina . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 October 23.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript