Clinically Focused Molecular Investigation of 1000 Consecutive 
Families with Inherited Retinal Disease
Edwin M. Stone, M.D., Ph.D.1,3, Jeaneen L. Andorf, B.A.1,3, S. Scott Whitmore, Ph.D.1,3, 
Adam P. DeLuca, Ph.D.1,3, Joseph C. Giacalone, B.S.1,3, Luan M. Streb, B.A.1,3, Terry A. 
Braun, Ph.D.1,3, Robert F. Mullins, Ph.D.1,3, Todd E. Scheetz, Ph.D.1,3, Val C. Sheffield, M.D., 
Ph.D.1,2,3, and Budd A. Tucker, Ph.D.1,3
1Departments of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, the University of Iowa Carver College of 
Medicine, Iowa City, IA
2Pediatrics, the University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA
3Stephen A. Wynn Institute for Vision Research, the University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA
Abstract
Purpose— To devise a comprehensive multi-platform genetic testing strategy for inherited retinal 
disease and describe its performance in 1,000 consecutive families seen by a single clinician.
Methods— The clinical records of all patients seen by a single retina specialist between January 
2010 and June 2016 were reviewed and all patients who met the clinical criteria for a diagnosis of 
inherited retinal disease were included in the study. Each patient was assigned to one of 62 
diagnostic categories and this clinical diagnosis was used to define the scope and order of the 
molecular investigations that were performed. The number of nucleotides evaluated in a given 
subject ranged from two (a multiplex allele-specific assay for the most common mutations in 
BBS1  and BBS10 ) to nearly 900,000 (the coding sequences, and splice junctions of 305 genes 
known to cause inherited retinal disease).
Results— Disease-causing genotypes were identified in 760 families (76%). These genotypes 
were distributed across 104 different genes. More than 70% of these 104 genes have coding 
sequences small enough to be efficiently packaged into an adeno-associated virus. Mutations in 
ABCA4  were the most common cause of disease in this cohort (173 families) while mutations in 
80 genes caused disease in five or fewer families (i.e., 0.5% or less). Disease-causing genotypes 
were identified in 576 of the families without next generation sequencing (NGS). This included 23 
families with mutations in the repetitive region of RPGR exon 15 that would have been missed by 
NGS. Whole exome sequencing of the remaining 424 families revealed mutations in an additional 
182, and whole genome sequencing of four of the remaining 242 families revealed two additional 
genotypes that were invisible by the other methods. Performing the testing in a clinically-focused 
Correspondence should be addressed to: Edwin M. Stone, M.D., Ph.D., The Stephen A Wynn Institute for Vision Research, 375 
Newton Road, 4111 MERF, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, 319-335-8270, edwin-stone@uiowa.edu. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Ophthalmology . 2017 September ; 124(9): 1314–1331. doi:10.1016/j.ophtha.2017.04.008.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscripttiered fashion would be 6.1% more sensitive, 17.7% less expensive and have a significantly lower 
average false genotype rate than using whole exome sequencing to assess more than 300 genes in 
all patients (7.1 vs. 128%; p<0.001).
Conclusions— Genetic testing for inherited retinal disease is now more than 75% sensitive. A 
clinically-directed tiered testing strategy can increase sensitivity and improve statistical 
significance without increasing cost.
When the first inherited retinal disease genes were discovered in the late 1980s and early 
1990s 1-3, ophthalmic genetics was largely a descriptive subspecialty. The primary goals of 
the ophthalmologist were to give the patient's condition a name and to try to discern the 
inheritance pattern so that one could give the patient and their family members a reasonably 
accurate estimate of the risk that other family members would be affected with a similar 
disease. At that time, the chance that a molecular diagnosis could be accomplished for the 
average patient with an inherited retinal disease was less than 5%, and such tests were only 
performed by a few research laboratories.
The main limitations to molecular diagnosis in the early 1990's were the overall lack of 
knowledge of the human genome and the relatively crude and laborious methods for 
investigating it. An often underappreciated positive effect of those limitations was that 
molecular tests in the early 1990s tended to be very focused by the clinical features of the 
family being studied. For example, one would not have sequenced the rhodopsin gene in a 
person with the clinical features of Best disease and thus would not have been in a position 
to observe a rare non-disease-causing polymorphism in the rhodopsin gene and incorrectly 
conclude that it was disease-causing in that patient.
Many things have changed in ophthalmic genetics in the past 25 years, perhaps most notably 
the successful use of gene therapy for inherited retinal disease 4-6, the more widespread 
availability of preimplantation genetic testing to reduce the recurrence of severe genetic 
diseases, and the introduction of CRISPR-based genome editing 7-9, which, when coupled 
with induced pluripotent stem cells 10,11 and in vitro  retinal differentiation have the potential 
to generate immunologically-matched genetically-corrected cells for therapeutic 
transplantation 10,11 (see Table 1 for a glossary of abbreviations and acronyms used in this 
paper). The advent of these gene-directed interventions have increased both the value and 
the risks of genetic testing. For these treatments to work, one must know the disease-causing 
gene and in some cases the exact disease-causing mutations with complete accuracy. The 
diagnostic goal of the clinician is no longer to just give the clinical findings a name, it is to 
identify the patient's disease-causing genotype with sufficient accuracy that the probability 
of a gene-directed intervention helping the patient is significantly greater than the possibility 
that it will cause harm.
Fortunately, genetic testing methods have also changed dramatically in recent years. What 
was once considered to be the largest scientific undertaking of mankind, the sequencing of 
the entire human genome 12,13, can now be accomplished in an individual patient in just a 
few weeks time for a few thousand dollars. This has led some to believe that experienced 
clinicians are now less necessary for the care of patients with inherited diseases and that the 
tests themselves are so powerful that they can provide the correct answer in almost any Stone et al. Page 2
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptclinical situation regardless of the quality or quantity of accompanying clinical information. 
Actually, the reverse is true. As genetic tests have become larger in scope and sensitivity, the 
need for exceptionally detailed and accurate clinical information has also increased. This is 
primarily because there is a lot of normal variation in the human genome – millions of 
genetic differences between any two healthy individuals – and as a result, very broad 
investigations will always result in multiple plausibly-disease-causing findings that will need 
to be winnowed to one on clinical grounds.
We undertook this study for several related purposes: 1) to determine the current overall 
sensitivity of genetic testing for inherited retinal disease, 2) to determine the relative 
frequencies of inherited retinal disorders seen in a single North American eye clinic, 3) to 
determine the proportions of these diseases caused by mutations in specific genes, 4) to 
develop a teachable algorithm for pretest clinical diagnosis, 5) to evaluate the efficiency of a 
clinically-driven tiered genetic testing strategy, and 6) to provide practicing 
ophthalmologists some insight into the complexity of next generation sequencing data and 
the obligation to apply corrections for multiple measurements to these data.
Methods
Human Subjects
This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the University of Iowa and 
adhered to the tenets set forth in the Declaration of Helsinki. All patients seen by a single 
clinician (EMS) in the Retina Clinic of the University of Iowa Department of 
Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences between January 2010 and June 2016, who were judged 
by that clinician to have a monogenic heritable component to their eye disease, and who 
were 60 years of age or younger when first symptomatic, were offered inclusion in the study. 
Those who chose to participate (more than 99% of those invited) provided written informed 
consent. In many cases, additional family members were also invited to participate in the 
study either at the time of the original clinic visit, at a later visit, or by sending samples and 
records by mail. Patients with the following clinical diagnoses were excluded from the 
cohort: age-related macular degeneration, central serous retinopathy, autoimmune retinal 
disease, and acute zonal occult outer retinopathy (AZOOR).
Clinical Assessment
All probands and available family members underwent a complete eye examination 
including visual acuity assessment, intraocular pressure measurement, evaluation of ocular 
motility and pupils, slit lamp biomicroscopy, and indirect ophthalmoscopy. The majority of 
patients also underwent Goldmann perimetry, color fundus photography, and spectral 
domain optical coherence tomography. A subset also had an assessment of color vision, 
reduced intensity autofluorescence imaging 14, fluorescein angiography and/or 
electroretinography according to ISCEV standards 15.
Diagnostic Classification
All available historical, clinical, electrophysiological and imaging data from each participant 
were digitized and re-reviewed by a single clinician (EMS) for the purpose of placing each Stone et al. Page 3
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptof the 1,000 probands into an objectively defined clinical category. A patient's genotype was 
never used to place them into a category. Even when a clinical diagnosis appeared to be 
“wrong” after genetic testing (such as the de novo  rhodopsin mutation that mimicked 
autosomal recessive ECORD in a young female – patient # 442 in Supplemental Table 1), 
the original clinical diagnosis was retained. The purpose of this objective assignment was to 
allow us to determine how many patients out of 1000 would fall into each specific clinical 
category and, which genes were responsible for disease in each of these objectively defined 
categories. The names and inclusion criteria for the majority of the 96 resulting diagnostic 
categories (Figure 1, Table 2) are for the most part well defined in the existing clinical 
literature. However, in a few cases, some empiric rules were established to more clearly 
define the borders between categories (see Results). Also, the higher order grouping of the 
individual categories was somewhat non-standard and was chosen to minimize the number 
of decisions or clinical tests that were needed to place a patient into their category.
Disease Genes
The published literature was reviewed to identify all genes that had been convincingly 
shown to cause genetic retinal disease. These 305 genes (Supplemental Table 2) were 
divided into two groups based on whether a gene was only known to cause severe 
progressive loss of cognition and/or neuromuscular control and/or significantly shortened 
life expectancy (43 genes) or not (262 genes). The published literature was also reviewed to 
identify the retinal phenotypes that had been previously associated with each of these 305 
genes and these data were used to associate each gene with one or more of the 96 diagnostic 
categories shown in Figure 1, Table 2 and Supplemental Table 2. The 43 genes associated 
with the more severe systemic diseases were only included in the analysis when clinical 
features suggestive of a debilitating systemic phenotype were already manifest.
DNA Extraction
Blood samples were obtained from all probands (n = 1,000) and available family members 
(n = 2,348) and DNA was extracted by using the manufacturer's specifications for whole-
blood DNA extraction using Gentra System's Autopure LS instrument.
First Tier Genetic Testing
A preliminary mutation detection probability distribution (MDPD 16) was established for 
each of the 96 clinical categories using a combination of the published literature and the 
anonymized summary experience of the Carver Nonprofit Genetic Testing Laboratory at the 
University of Iowa. These MDPDs were used to devise focused screens designed to detect 
the most common disease-causing alleles of the most common genes associated with each of 
the diagnostic categories. These screens each employed one or more of the following 
approaches: automated Sanger sequencing with an ABI 3730xl sequencer, allele-specific 
genotyping with a Fluidigm EP1, amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS 17), 
chromosomal microarray analysis, and/or plasmid cloning of PCR products followed by 
Sanger sequencing. Variants were considered “disease-causing” if they met our previously 
published criteria 18 for an Estimate of Pathogenic Probability (EPP) of 2 or 3. A genotype 
was considered “convincing,” and the patient included in the calculation of the solve rate for 
that diagnostic category, if it consisted of a heterozygous mutation with an EPP of 2 or 3 in a Stone et al. Page 4
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptgene known to cause a dominant disease, a hemizygous mutation with an EPP of 2 or 3 in a 
gene known to cause X-linked disease; or, two mutations (suspected to lie on separate alleles 
by direct observation or statistical inference) each with an EPP of 2 or 3, in a gene known to 
cause recessive disease.
Cloning and Sequencing of RPGR  Exon 15
To detect mutations in the low complexity region of RPGR exon 15, Sanger sequencing of 
TA cloned PCR products was performed. Patient DNA was PCR amplified and the products 
were gel purified and TA cloned into the pCR®2.1 TOPO® Vector using the TOPO® TA 
Cloning® Kit (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY). TA cloned PCR products were transformed 
using One Shot® TOP10 chemically competent cells (Invitrogen). Transformed cells were 
subsequently streaked and cultured on AIX plates (AIX; Aachen, Germany) for blue-white 
colony screening. Validated clones were picked, expanded in LB broth, purified and Sanger 
sequenced on the ABI 3730xl sequencer using optimized sequencing chemistry.
Next Generation Sequencing
Whole exome sequencing was performed using the Agilent v5 exome kit with the addition 
of custom xGen Lockdown probes (IDT, Coralville IA) to target regions of the genome 
relevant to eye disease that are not well covered in the standard exome kit. These regions 
cover known non-coding mutations in CEP290 , USH2A , ABCA4 , and the L/M opsin 
cluster, in addition to insufficiently covered coding exonic sequence in genes such as 
ABCC6  (all bait sequences available upon request). Whole exome sequencing was 
performed using the Illumina HiSeq 2500 or 4000. Whole Genome Sequencing was 
performed using the HiSeq X (Hudson Alpha; Huntsville, AL). Sequences were aligned to 
the genome using BWA 19. Single nucleotide variations and small insertions and deletions 
were called using GATK 20. Structural variants were called using Conifer 21 and Manta 22.
Calculation of the False Genotype Rate (FGR)
Genetic variations that cause rare, high-penetrance, monogenic diseases are also rare in the 
population and most genotyping pipelines, including ours, remove variants that are too 
common to cause the rare diseases under study. For this project, the cutoff for recessive 
variants was set at 0.006 (the frequency of the more common well-established disease-
causing mutations in ABCA4 ), the cutoff for mitochondrial variants was 0.004 (the 
frequency of the most common LHON variant, 11778), and the cutoff for dominant disease 
was set at 0.0001 (the frequency of the most common well-established mutations in RHO ). 
The frequency at which one would encounter a variant at or below these thresholds in 
healthy people is proportional to the amount of exomic sequence analyzed and was directly 
measured by applying the pipeline cutoff values to the whole exome data from the 60,000 
healthy individuals collected by the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC 23) and 
mitochondrial variants observed in 32,000 healthy individuals in MitoMap 24. We defined 
the false genotype rate (FGR) as the frequency with which one would encounter a plausibly 
disease-causing recessive or dominant complete genotype when sequencing the coding 
regions of a specific set of genes in a healthy person. We used the ExAC data to calculate 
FGR values for each group of genes mapped to each specific clinical category (Figure 1). 
The FGR is conceptually very similar to the commonly used false discovery rate (FDR). We Stone et al. Page 5
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptchose the term FGR for the current analysis because: 1) we had recessive complete 
genotypes for some genes and dominant mutations for others; 2) the recessive genotypes 
were not directly observed, but modeled from data from the ExAC database; and, 3) we 
wanted to fully convey the associated risk of an incorrect genetic test result.
Calculation of Genetic Test Costs
For each diagnostic category, a specific sequence of tests was devised based upon the 
mutation detection probability distribution 16 for that category obtained from both the 
published literature and the anonymized experience of the Carver Nonprofit Genetic Testing 
Laboratory at the University of Iowa. During development, each step in the testing sequence 
was optimized by subjecting it to a cost analysis (available upon request). For the analysis in 
this paper, the research cost of the currently recommended sequence of tests for each patient 
was calculated based upon their pre-test clinical diagnosis (details of the specific testing 
order, primer sequences, PCR conditions, etc., for any diagnostic category is available by 
request to the authors). The current research costs of the test components are: DNA 
extraction and quality control genetic markers -$40; Amplification Refractory Mutation 
System reaction - $38; one set of 44 alleles assayed using the Fluidigm system - $35; 
bidirectional Sanger sequencing of one PCR amplimer - $20; chromosomal microarray 
analysis - $500; TA-cloning and bidirectional sequencing of RPGR  exon 15 codons 762 to 
1,100 - $650 for males and $975 for females; whole exome sequencing, analysis and 
confirmation - $1,200; whole genome sequencing - $2,450.
Results
The 1,000 probands in this study came to our clinic from 40 different states, the District of 
Columbia and seven foreign countries (Supplemental Figure 1). Four hundred eighty-nine 
were female and 511 were male. The average age at entry into the study was 37.3 years 
(36.3 years for males and 38.5 years for females); the range was 8 months to 88 years. 
Plausible disease-causing genotypes were identified in 760 of these probands, 393 males and 
367 females (Supplemental Table 1). The average age at entry into the study was very 
slightly younger for those in whom a disease-causing genotype was identified (34.9 years for 
males and 37.7 years for females).
The clinical classification system (Figure 1, Table 2) used in this study was devised as a 
means for clinicians who see adults and older children with inherited retinal diseases to 1) 
efficiently communicate their clinical impressions to the molecular diagnostic laboratory 
charged with identifying the patients' disease-causing mutations; and 2) to narrow the pre-
test hypothesis to the smallest number of genes possible at our current level of clinical 
understanding. For the most part, the names used to refer to the individual clinical entities in 
the classification system are in common clinical use, and only the higher order grouping of 
these terms is in any way unusual. This grouping was chosen to keep entities with similar 
genetic causes as close to one another as possible in the diagnostic tree so that if the initial 
screening was negative, a laboratory could recursively enlarge the molecular hypothesis in 
the most statistically efficient manner. For example, RDS -associated pattern dystrophy and 
ABCA4 -associated Stargardt disease can cause almost identical clinical findings in selected Stone et al. Page 6
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptpatients. As a result, these categories are adjacent to each other in the classification scheme. 
If a screen of ABCA4  were negative, the lab would screen RDS  (even without a dominant 
family history) before moving on to screen larger genomic spaces. The most clinically 
homogeneous and genetically heterogeneous groups were those affected with non-
syndromic acquired photoreceptor degeneration (retinitis pigmentosa – group IA1a; and, 
cone or cone rod dystrophy – group IA1b; Figure 1). Multiplex kindreds belonging to these 
large categories were subdivided according to their pedigree structure as follows: i – X-
linked (affected males in multiple sibships connected to each other through unaffected or 
mildly affected females with no instances of male to male transmission), ii – autosomal 
dominant (a minimum of three generations with at least one instance of male to male 
transmission), iii – autosomal recessive (multiple affected individuals in a single sibship 
with normal parents), and iv – other multiplex (all other multiplex kindreds).
Placement into one of the first three categories of congenital/stationary photoreceptor 
disease (IA2a-c) required clear historical evidence of parental or physician awareness of 
significant visual dysfunction – more than just night blindness – before the patient's fourth 
birthday. These patients were further divided into: a – Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) if 
their visual acuity was so poor that they did not use it for education or activities of daily 
living; b – Severe Early Childhood Onset Retinal Dystrophy (SECORD 25) if they had 
useful vision but became legally blind before age 10; or, c – Early Childhood Onset Retinal 
Dystrophy (ECORD) if they were not legally blind before age 10. Patients were diagnosed 
with Congenital Stationary Synaptic Dysfunction (IA2g) if they had stable reduced acuity 
from birth, selective loss of the b-wave on the scotopic ERG, diminished b-wave amplitudes 
on the photopic ERG, but no difficulties with vision in dim light.
As the clinical records for the 1,000 patients and their relatives were reviewed to place them 
into these categories, it became evident that ten types of easily obtainable historical 
information were of particular value in reproducibly assigning patients to these categories 
and a form was created to assist physicians in acquiring these historical data in a prospective 
manner (Supplemental Table 4).
For this study, patients could be assigned to a higher-order point in the classification system 
if there were insufficient data to make a more specific assignment. For example, isolated 
patients with retinitis pigmentosa were assigned to IA1a while a member of an autosomal 
dominant family with affected individuals in three generations and clear male to male 
transmission was assigned to IA1aii. Of the 96 possible locations a proband could be placed 
in this classification system, only 62 were used at least once when subdividing the 1,000 
probands in this study (Figure 1 and Table 2).
Figure 2 shows the breakdown of the 1,000 probands among the most common diagnostic 
categories while Figure 1 shows the frequency with which a convincing disease-causing 
genotype could be identified in each of these categories. In this cohort, 64.7% of the 
probands had photoreceptor disease (Category I), 28.2% had a macular dystrophy (Category 
II) and 7.1% had one of the 42 entities of the Category III. Overall, convincing genotypes 
were identified in 76% of the probands with the highest positivity among those with a 
macular dystrophy (88.3%). With four exceptions, patients with autosomal recessive disease Stone et al. Page 7
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptwere only considered positive if they had both disease alleles identified. The exceptions 
were patients with a clinical diagnosis of Stargardt disease (23 probands), Usher syndrome 
(two Type-1 and five Type-2 probands), achromatopsia (one proband) and homocystinuria 
(one proband), who were each found to have a convincing disease-causing mutation on only 
one allele (the FGR was less than 1% for each of these pre-test hypotheses).
Figure 1 also shows the genetic heterogeneity of each of the 62 clinical categories with at 
least one patient assigned to it in this study. The most heterogeneous category was simplex 
RP (IA1a) which had disease-causing mutations identified in 36 different genes and a total 
solve rate of only 56.7%. The least heterogeneous category with at least ten probands in it 
was choroideremia (IIIA1), which had a 100% solve rate in 14 patients, all with mutations in 
a single gene (CHM).
Figure 3, Table 3 and Supplemental Table 3 show the frequencies of disease-causing 
genotypes in each of the 104 genes that were found to cause disease in at least one family in 
the cohort. ABCA4  was the single most common disease-causing gene and was responsible 
for disease in 173 families. Twelve additional genes, USH2A, RPGR, RHO, PRPH2, 
BEST1, CRB1, BBS1, CEP290, PRPF31, CHM, RS1, and RP1  each caused disease in 1% 
or more of the cohort and these 13 genes were collectively responsible for disease in almost 
one half of the families (497). The remaining 91 genes each caused disease in less than 1% 
of the cohort and collectively caused disease in 26.2% of the total. Thirty of the genes each 
caused disease in a single family and one family had a de novo  chromosomal translocation. 
This cohort is certainly not a random sample of the US population. However, it was 
ascertained consecutively, and was drawn from 40 of the 50 US states. Thus, we felt that it 
would be reasonable to use these data to provide a rough estimate of the total number of 
individuals affected with each gene-specific disease in the country. Assuming that mutations 
in ABCA4  cause disease in 1/10,000 people 26, Table 3 gives an estimate for the total 
number of people of all ages in the US with mutations in this gene. Similarly, by using 2010 
US census data that show 20.2 million people in the US under the age of 5 27, one can also 
estimate the number of new cases of each gene-specific retinal disease in the US per year. 
Collectively, these data suggest that there are currently about 140,000 people in the US 
affected with one of the diseases evaluated in this study and about 1,700 new cases per year.
Figure 4 depicts a cost and yield comparison of two different strategies one could employ for 
genotyping the 1,000 probands of this study. In one case, whole exome sequencing would be 
performed on every proband and the resulting data would be evaluated for mutations in the 
301 non-mitochondrial genes selected for inclusion in this study (see Methods). In this case, 
the cost to genotype each patient would be the same ($1,200, see methods) and the overall 
yield would be 70%. The mutations that would be missed would be those that lie in 
noncoding sequences (e.g., non-exomic mutations that cause Stargardt disease 28, Usher 
syndrome 29, retinitis pigmentosa 30, Leber congenital amaurosis 31,32 and North Carolina 
Macular Dystrophy 33), mitochondrial DNA (e.g., mutations that cause Leber hereditary 
optic neuropathy 34 and maternally inherited diabetes and deafness 35), and repetitive 
regions (e.g., the repetitive region of RPGR exon 15 36-38). In the other case, one would use 
a tiered testing strategy in which the testing was customized based upon the clinical findings 
and testing was stopped once a complete genotype was identified. With the latter strategy, Stone et al. Page 8
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptthe cost would range from $80 per patient (for those in whom a complete genotype was 
identified in the initial tier of testing) to more than $2,500 for those who did not have a 
complete genotype found on prescreening and were judged suitable for whole genome 
testing (see methods). With this tiered strategy, the average cost per patient would be 17.7% 
less than performing whole exome sequencing in everyone ($990) and the sensitivity would 
be a 6.1% higher because of the findings one would make in the non-coding regions, 
mitochondrial genes, and repetitive DNA that were specifically included in the clinically 
focused tests.
Figure 5 depicts the more important difference between the two screening strategies: the 
effect on the false genotype rate. Genetic variants that are rare enough in the general 
population to cause a Mendelian retinal disease are surprisingly common in whole exome 
sequencing data. In this study, the population frequency cutoff was set according to the most 
common well-established retinal disease-causing mutations (see methods). If one applies 
these criteria to the sequence data of the 60,000 healthy individuals in the ExAC database 23, 
one observes an average of 1.28 plausible disease-causing genotypes per person among the 
coding sequences of the 301 non-mitochondrial candidate genes considered in this study. 
Another way to state this is that with a coding sequence hypothesis 301 genes in size, there 
is an average FGR (see Methods) of 128%. For most medical tests, one would want a 
positive result to occur by chance no more than 5% of the time and for tests that would be 
used as the basis of preimplantation genetic testing or subretinal gene therapy, one might 
argue that it should be even less.
Figure 5 shows that one can reduce the false genotype rate to clinically useful levels by 
narrowing the pre-test hypothesis to a relatively small number of genes. A tiered testing 
strategy linked to the clinical classification system in this study would identify plausible 
disease-causing genotypes in 48.7% of the cohort with an FGR less than 5%. Supplemental 
Figure 2 shows that one can also reduce the FGR per category at a given institution by first 
considering the genes that have been previously observed to cause disease in patients seen at 
that institution, and then if negative, considering a larger literature-based group of candidates 
and adding a statistical penalty for the additional hypothesis. The rationale for this two-step 
analysis is that the previous 1,000 patients seen in a given institution are likely to be more 
genetically similar to the next 1,000 patients seen there than they will be to the entire world 
population represented in the published literature.
For patients whose FGR is greater than 5%, which using the tiered strategy is most 
commonly due to our current inability to reduce the genetic heterogeneity of categories like 
simplex retinitis pigmentosa on clinical grounds (Figure 1), it is especially important to 
confirm the phase and/or segregation of their putative disease-causing variant(s) and to be a 
bit more skeptical of molecularly weaker genotypes such as those comprised entirely of 
novel missense variants. Table 4 shows the distribution of the 760 disease-causing genotypes 
identified in this study among inheritance patterns and mutation types. 2.5% of the 
genotypes involved molecularly confirmed de novo  variants, which is a considerable 
underestimate of the actual de novo  rate given that sufficient family samples to evaluate both 
parental alleles were available in fewer than 65% of families.Stone et al. Page 9
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFive Illustrative Patients
Patient A is 47-year-old male who first noticed difficulty following the flight of a ball in his 
20's (Supplemental Table 1, #375). In his early 40's he was examined and felt to have a cone 
dystrophy. He has no family history of a similar disorder. Our examination revealed a best 
corrected visual acuity of 20/50 OD and 20/80 OS. Ophthalmoscopy revealed an iridescent 
golden sheen to the entire posterior pole with the exception of a reddish atrophic circular 
area 1.5 mm in diameter centered on the fovea OU (Figure 6A). Optical coherence 
tomography showed a sharply demarcated loss of photoreceptors and RPE corresponding to 
the atrophic area seen on fundus examination (Figure 6B). Goldmann perimetry revealed a 
loss of the I2e isopter as well as a central scotoma to the III4e (Figure 6C). Plasmid cloning 
and DNA sequencing of the repetitive portion of RPGR exon 15 revealed a two base pair 
deletion in codon 1059. RPGR  codons 800-1070 are poorly covered by whole exome 
sequencing and this mutation is undetectable with this method. It is also interesting that 
some frameshifting mutations in this exon are associated with a late onset cone selective 
disease 37,38, as seen in this patient, while similar mutations elsewhere in the gene cause 
severe rod predominant retinitis pigmentosa.
Patient B is an 8-year-old male who first noted difficulties seeing in dim light in early 
childhood. His maternal grandfather had been diagnosed with choroideremia. On our 
examination his visual acuity was 20/32-1 OD and 20/32-2 OS. Ophthalmoscopy revealed 
extensive nummular areas of RPE and choriocapillaris loss each surrounded by a thin rim of 
hyperpigmented RPE (Figure 7A). The retinal arterioles were near normal in caliber. The 
Goldmann visual fields were surprisingly well preserved for this degree of retinal loss 
(Figure 7B). His mother (Supplemental Table 1, #938) and sister both exhibited “mud 
spattered” pigment mottling of the fundus consistent with the carrier state of an X-linked 
disease. Conventional DNA sequencing failed to detect a mutation in the CHM  gene. 
However, the phenotype and history were so convincing that whole genome sequencing was 
performed in the child which revealed a complete duplication of CHM  exons 6-8 which had 
been invisible to the non-quantiptative PCR-based DNA sequencing.
Patient C is a 48-year-old female who first had macular pigment mottling noticed 
incidentally on fundus examination at age 33 (Supplemental Table 1, #920). Her best 
corrected visual acuity on our examination was 20/20 OD and 20/60+2 OS. 
Ophthalmoscopy revealed patchy loss of the RPE and choriocapillaris OS more than OD 
(Figure 8A and 8B). Fundus autofluorescence revealed more extensive involvement than was 
visible ophthalmoscopically (Figure 8C and 8D). She developed gestational diabetes at age 
27 and was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes at age 32. Her mother and maternal aunt are both 
diabetic as well. She developed hearing loss in her mid 30's and now wears hearing aids. 
PCR-based conventional DNA sequencing revealed a heteroplasmic mutation in the 
mitochondrial DNA at position 3243, which is known to cause an atrophic maculopathy with 
maternally inherited diabetes and deafness 35. Whole exome sequencing does not routinely 
assess mitochondrial DNA and as a result this mutation would have been missed unless it 
was specifically sought because of her phenotype.
Patient D is a 10-year-old female who first had difficulty seeing the blackboard in school at 
7 years of age. She has a family history of a similar disease in her father. Her best corrected Stone et al. Page 10
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptvisual acuity on our examination was 20/200+2 OD and 20/200+1 OS. Ophthalmoscopy 
revealed a circular area of retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) atrophy 1 mm in diameter 
centered on fixation OU and yellow pisciform flecks throughout the posterior pole OU 
(Figure 9A). Optical coherence tomography revealed thinning of the outer nuclear layer and 
disruption of the ellipsoid zone in an area somewhat larger than the area of RPE atrophy 
(Figure 9B). Goldmann perimetry was normal except for small central scotomas to the I4e 
OU (Figure 9C). Sanger sequencing of the coding portions of the ABCA4 gene revealed a 
single heterozygous missense mutation (Leu2229Pro). Sequencing of non-exomic regions 
previously shown to harbor disease-causing mutations revealed a previously described 28 
cryptic splice activator on the allele opposite the missense variation (IVS36+1216 C>A). 
The non-exomic mutation would not have been captured by any currently available 
commercial exome capture reagents.
Patient E is the 42-year-old father of patient D who first noticed difficulty with his central 
vision at age 6 (Supplemental Table 1, #804). The following year he was diagnosed with 
Stargardt disease and by age 13 his acuity had fallen to 20/400 OD and 20/240 OS. On this 
visit, his acuity was 20/800 OD and 20/250 OS. Ophthalmoscopy revealed an elliptical zone 
of RPE and choriocapillaris atrophy centered on fixation, very narrowed arterioles, and 
extensive bone-spicule like pigment in the midperiphery OU (Figure 10A). Optical 
coherence tomography (Figure 10B) revealed preservation of inner retinal lamination even in 
the area of macular atrophy. Goldman perimetry revealed complete loss of sensitivity to the 
I4e stimulus throughout the visual field and an absolute scotoma inferonasally OU (Figure 
10C). This patient shared the IVS36+1216 C>A non-exomic mutation with his daughter and 
harbored an Arg2077Trp variant on his other allele. Schindler et al., (2010) found the 
Arg2077Trp variant to be the most severe Stargardt allele of the sixteen they evaluated 39. 
This is consistent with the more severe RP-like phenotype in this individual.
Discussion
Data that are used to arrive at a diagnosis are often incomplete, noisy and somewhat biased. 
Once a diagnosis is made, treatment outcomes are also dependent upon individual patient 
variation, the point in the disease course that a treatment is administered, and in some cases, 
the skill of a surgeon in delivering a treatment to the desired anatomic location. Most 
physicians effectively combat these challenges with systematic actions, good record keeping 
and periodic review of their outcomes in the context of new knowledge. The purpose of this 
study was to review the clinical and molecular findings from 1,000 consecutive families 
affected with inherited retinal disease – in the context of current technology, public 
databases and literature – to identify opportunities for improving our accuracy and efficiency 
in arriving at clinical and molecular diagnoses for patients with inherited retinal diseases. 
The consecutive nature of the ascertainment allows a rough approximation of the total 
numbers of individuals in the United States who are affected by various categories of disease 
(Table 3). These data may be useful as scientists try to devise and implement practical 
comprehensive strategies for reaching all such patients with some type of useful treatment.
The clinical classification system used in this study (Figure 1, Table 2) is an empiric, 
internally consistent shorthand that can be used to efficiently communicate clinical Stone et al. Page 11
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptobservations to the laboratory for the purpose of guiding their molecular investigations, 
analyses and interpretations, and to align the resulting genotype-phenotype correlations with 
the constantly changing medical literature. This system was devised by a single clinician 
over many years and should not be considered a consensus view of how these disorders can 
be most meaningfully arranged. It is expected and desirable that other physicians will add or 
subtract categories from this classification scheme as needed to encompass the patients they 
see in their practice, and to move the clinical entities around to better reflect the order in 
which they typically pursue a diagnostic workup and the specific diagnostic instruments 
routinely available to them. The power of this approach lies not in the details of the 
classification system but in the idea of using clinical information to narrow the pretest 
hypothesis for the purpose of increasing the sensitivity of the testing and dramatically 
increasing the statistical significance of the results. To reduce the FGR below 5%, which 
would be desirable when contemplating a significant intervention such as gene replacement 
therapy or the preimplantation selection of embryos for disease avoidance, one would need 
to reduce the pretest hypothesis in most cases to fewer than ten genes (e.g., category IA2b, 
Figure 1). More than 85% of the terminal categories in the current classification scheme 
have a FGR of 5% or less (blue bars, Figure 1). The remaining task for clinicians who care 
for patients with inherited retinal diseases is to carefully scrutinize the ones in the more 
genetically heterogeneous categories (grey bars, Figure 1) for subtle clinical signs that can 
be used to further subdivide them into entities associated with a smaller number of genes. 
Over time, some diagnostic categories and classification arrangements will prove more 
useful than others for this purpose and an optimal scheme for all inherited eye disease can 
evolve by combining the best features of many classifications based upon their performance 
in the pretest prediction of the patients' genotypes.
There are many different strategies that one can use to analyze a patient's DNA for the 
presence of disease-causing sequence variations and a complete discussion of them is well 
beyond the scope of this paper. For the present purpose, it is sufficient to think of the many 
possibilities in terms of four attributes: 1) the degree to which a test can be customized to 
detect specific variations that would otherwise be missed; 2) the degree to which the test 
yields a dataset that can be re-analyzed in the future to discover currently unrecognized 
pathogenic variations; 3) the degree to which multiple platforms are employed to maximize 
the strengths and minimize the weaknesses of each; and, 4) the degree to which the patients' 
true disease-causing genotypes will be obscured by normal, non-disease-causing genetic 
variation.
Next generation sequencing “panels” have now been designed for many diseases and have 
the advantages that they are relatively focused (compared to whole exome or whole genome 
tests), they can be customized to include specific non-exomic regions known to cause 
disease, and they are relatively quick and inexpensive to perform. The disadvantage of such 
panels is that when negative, they do not allow wider analytical exploration in search of 
disease-causing mutations outside the genomic space covered by the panel's design. These 
panels have difficulty in accurately detecting variants within repetitive DNA sequences and 
can have difficulty detecting deletions larger than 100 nucleotides and smaller than a few 
exons in size. Moreover, most of these panels evaluate a sufficient number of genes that the 
false genotype rate associated with them is greater than 5% unless the ordering physician Stone et al. Page 12
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptcontrols this by making a firm and narrow pre-test diagnosis and rigorously evaluates the 
results in that context.
Whole exome sequencing has the advantage of sampling nearly all of the transcribed 
sequences in the human genome and can be subjected to very focused analysis to yield 
statistically meaningful results. If such a focused analysis is negative, the data can be 
reanalyzed to consider a larger portion of the exome and/or reanalyzed at a later date when 
new regions of the exome may have been discovered to cause a phenotype similar to the 
patient under study. The disadvantages of whole exome sequencing are that it is more 
expensive and time consuming to perform than a next generation sequencing panel and most 
commercial whole exome reagents are not easily customizable to analyze specific non-
exomic regions of interest to specific subspecialties of medicine. Whole exome sequencing 
also has difficulty with repetitive DNA and can have even greater difficulty detecting single 
exon deletions than NGS-based panels 40,41. As shown in Figure 5, unless one establishes a 
narrow pretest hypothesis and evaluates the results accordingly, whole genome sequencing 
will frequently have a false genotype rate that is so high that the results should be considered 
hypothesis generating at best.
Whole genome sequencing evaluates nearly all of the non-repetitive sequences in the 
genome and, although it examines more than fifty times more sequence than whole exome 
sequencing, is surprisingly only about twice as expensive as the latter method. It is better at 
detecting deletions, duplications and inversions than whole exome sequencing 42 and can 
also detect disease-causing variations in non-exomic space 33,43-45. However, the amount of 
background genetic variation in the nonexomic space is so large, and our current 
understanding of the function of nonexomic sequences is currently so limited, that 
pathogenic single nucleotide variations will be completely hidden in the noise unless the 
pretest hypothesis is limited to only one or two genes and some functional test can be 
employed to validate the findings functionally 29,33,46. For example, the identification of a 
number of non-exomic mutations in ABCA4  28 required access to a large cohort of patients 
with convincing clinical characteristics of Stargardt disease and only a single disease-
causing mutation, as well as a rather narrow mechanistic hypothesis, altered splicing, 
coupled with a convincing assay of this mechanism. Similarly, the discovery of the non-
exomic mutations responsible for North Carolina Macular Dystrophy required decades of 
clinical and molecular genetic work to narrow the genetic interval to less than a million base 
pairs as well as sufficient families to identify three different mutations tightly clustered in a 
single regulatory element 33.
It is also important to remember that none of the commonly utilized high-throughput 
sequencing methods can unambiguously distinguish whether two different mutations 
observed in a patient were inherited from a single parent, which would not be expected to 
cause autosomal recessive disease, or whether they were inherited from both parents. The 
phase of two variants is most reliably established by testing a parent or child of the proband 
but in many cases can also be determined by testing siblings or more distant relatives. In 
multiplex families, confirming that all affected individuals actually harbor the genotype 
found in the proband also increases the likelihood that that genotype is truly disease-
causing 18. By reporting such properly segregating genotypes in the literature or through a Stone et al. Page 13
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptcurated database (e.g., vvd.eng.uiowa.edu), one can strengthen the confidence in those 
mutations for other physicians caring for other families.
It should go without saying that there is no need to employ the same genotyping strategy for 
every patient. Some phenotypes are so characteristic that they yield a pre-test hypothesis that 
can be evaluated with a single conventional DNA sequencing reaction, which costs less than 
$20 in the research setting (see Methods). Other phenotypes are associated with a small 
number of genes that can still be analyzed more quickly and with less financial and 
statistical cost than an entire exome or genome sequence would incur (Figures 4 and 5).
In this study, we divided all of the inherited eye diseases seen by a single clinician over a 5.5 
year period into 62 different categories and for all but 7 of these categories were able to 
devise very focused tests that cost less than an entire exome to perform. We reserved whole 
exome sequencing for the few clinical categories that were too broad for focused screening 
and for the cases that were negative after the initial test. We reserved whole genome 
sequencing for four families that had a phenotype that strongly implicated a single gene 
(e.g., Patient B, Figure 7) but had no mutations in the coding sequences of that gene. 
Although this tiered approach resulted in some patients having two or even three molecular 
evaluations, the focused tests were so inexpensive – less than half the cost of an exome on 
average – that the tiered strategy was overall less expensive than it would have been if we 
performed whole exome sequencing on every patient (Figure 4). The very customized nature 
of the prescreening tests also allowed very challenging portions of the genome to be 
successfully analyzed, such as the highly repetitive portion of exon 15 in RPGR  that is 
uninterpretable with most next generation sequencing methods. As a result, the sensitivity of 
our current tiered approach is a 6.1% higher than an all whole exome sequencing strategy 
would be.
Although the tiered strategy is currently 17.7% less expensive overall in our hands than an 
all whole exome sequencing approach would be in the same laboratory using the same 
personnel, this modest overall cost savings is not the main reason that we would employ or 
recommend this approach. The main reasons are to keep the average FGR as low as possible 
and to detect important disease-causing mutations that would otherwise be missed (Patients 
A – C, Figures 6 – 8). The clinical pre-test decision making necessary to achieve the low 
FGR results in a very low test cost for a large fraction of the patients (Figure 4). This savings 
in reagent cost and laboratory bandwidth can then be used to pursue much more expensive 
investigations, such as cloning the repetitive region of RPGR  exon 15, in the subset of 
patients that need it. This results in a higher overall sensitivity of the strategy at a lower cost. 
It is important to note that as the cost of whole exome sequencing and the associated 
analysis continues to fall, it will not supplant the value of specific pre-screening tests for 
many clinical categories until the whole exome sequencing cost falls below that of a single 
Sanger sequencing reaction. Thirteen of the 25 families with clinical BBS in this cohort had 
their mutations found in BBS1 , and all 13 of these harbored at least one M390R allele. As a 
result, we would recommend performing a Sanger sequencing reaction in search of this 
mutation in all BBS patients before proceeding to whole exome sequencing until the total 
cost of the latter falls below fifty dollars.Stone et al. Page 14
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptIt is interesting to consider what would happen to the data shown in Figures 4 and 5 if the 
research cost of whole exome and whole genome sequencing became one tenth what it is 
today (i.e., $120 and $245 per person, respectively). At these price points, the cost of the 
sequencing would be dwarfed by the cost of the sample handling, quality control measures, 
bioinformatic analysis, report writing and genetic counseling. As a result, our ratio of whole 
exome sequencing to whole genome sequencing would likely be the inverse of what it is 
today and we would also perform many fewer “prescreening tests”. Most of the latter would 
be performed to cover the low complexity parts of the genome that will continue to elude 
scrutiny by NGS methods. The overall sensitivity of the testing strategy would increase a 
few percent because whole genome sequencing is better at detecting copy number variations. 
However, the need for a narrow pre-test hypothesis would be identical to the need today 
because the average false genotype rate per base pair of investigated genome is an 
immutable fact of nature that is completely unaffected by the costs of the methods we 
employ or the speed with which we employ them.
One might expect that our next step in studying the cohort presented in this paper would be 
to perform whole genome sequencing in the 240 families that have yet to have their disease-
causing mutations identified. However, it is important to note that these families harbor an 
average of 16.5 plausible disease-causing mutations among the 305 candidate genes we 
considered in this study (Figure 1). It seems most likely to us that the majority of the 
genotypes remaining to be discovered in this cohort lie at least in part among the coding 
sequence variations that we have already detected or the coding sequences of other genes 
and that further clinical investigation of these families is likely to be more fruitful than 
increasing the number of rare variants to consider by more than two orders of magnitude. 
The aggressive ascertainment of additional members of these 240 families will allow us to 
strengthen or rule out many of the plausible disease-causing variants we have already 
identified on the basis of their segregation within the families. Continued scrutiny of the 
positive families in this cohort may also reveal some characteristic clinical features that 
would favor a specific one-allele hypothesis sufficiently that whole genome sequencing 
would be indicated in that family. This “families first” strategy would not change even if the 
cost of whole genome sequencing fell ten-fold. As noted above, the reason for this is that the 
amount of normal genetic variation in the genome is extremely large and independent of 
sequencing cost. The most powerful resources for overcoming this noise are, and will 
continue to be, large and well-characterized patient resources 28,33.
The disadvantages of a tiered testing strategy are that it requires very accurate 
communication between the clinic and the laboratory to gain the benefits described in this 
study, and tiered tests take much longer to perform than fragment capture panels. Although 
there are few situations in which a 3 or 4 month difference in testing time is clinically 
significant for a patient with a slowly progressive retinal degeneration, it is unquestionable 
that many families are anxious to have the cause of their disease identified as quickly as 
possible.
The keys to keeping the FGR down and sensitivity high are to 1) make the best clinical 
diagnosis possible before ordering a genetic test and use this diagnosis to choose the 
simplest test that is likely to yield a finding for that diagnosis, 2) obtain samples from Stone et al. Page 15
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptparents and siblings of simplex families and as many affected individuals as possible from 
multiplex pedigrees for use in evaluating the results in the proband, 3) know the cost 
breakpoint between multiple focused prescreens and whole exome sequencing and switch to 
whole exome sequencing before exceeding that breakpoint, 4) take advantage of the slow 
progression of most of these diseases by trying to have a result for the patient at their next 
visit instead of some arbitrarily short turnaround time that will artificially inflate the cost of 
the test.
Although the 76% sensitivity achieved in this study is a far cry from the zero percent of 
1986, it is likely to get even higher as we continue to analyze the 240 probands of this cohort 
whose molecular pathophysiology has yet to be determined. Some of the probands in this 
cohort are likely to have had inflammatory insults to their retinas that mimic Mendelian 
disease and it is possible that a predisposition to such disease may be detectable in their 
DNA as our knowledge of the genetics of the immune system continues to expand. There 
will certainly be additional disease-causing genes identified in the future by subjecting 
cohorts like this one to more sophisticated analysis or by studying multiplex families who 
lack mutations in currently known genes. There are also likely to be additional examples of 
non-exomic 29,33,46 and mitochondrial disease discovered as well as convincing cases of 
multiple genes interacting with one another to cause disease 47,48.
One advantage that we have today over 1986 is the ability to perform many genetic tests 
recursively, in silico , using inexhaustible data that is stored on servers instead of exhaustible 
DNA stored in freezers. Another advantage is the ability to derive phenotypically accurate 
retinal cell cultures from accessible tissues like skin, and to use these cells to test hypotheses 
that are generated from the DNA analysis 29,40,49. However, the most valuable resources 
needed to make these new discoveries are unchanged from 1986: relatively large numbers of 
patients with exceptionally detailed clinical information and large numbers of affected and 
unaffected family members that can be used to evaluate the many hypotheses that arise when 
studying the probands. As a result, the astute clinician, who is a good observer and record 
keeper, and who is willing to do whatever is necessary to find the correct answer and an 
effective treatment for his or her patient, remains the most valuable component of the entire 
effort.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
National Eye Institute (RO1EY024588, RO1EY026008), Wynn Institute for Vision Research, Carver Non-Profit 
Genetic Testing Laboratory, Stephen A. Wynn Foundation, Mark J. Daily, M.D.
References
1. Cavenee WK, Dryja TP, Phillips RA, et al. Expression of recessive alleles by chromosomal 
mechanisms in retinoblastoma. Nature. 1983; 305:779–784.
2. Friend SH, Bernards R, Rogelj S, et al. A human DNA segment with properties of the gene that 
predisposes to retinoblastoma and osteosarcoma. Nature. 1986; 323:643–646.Stone et al. Page 16
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript3. Dryja TP, McGee TL, Reichel E, et al. A point mutation of the rhodopsin gene in one form of 
retinitis pigmentosa. Nature. 1990; 343:364–366. [PubMed: 2137202] 
4. Maguire AM, Simonelli F, Pierce EA, et al. Safety and efficacy of gene transfer for Leber's 
congenital amaurosis. N Engl J Med. 2008; 358:2240–2248. [PubMed: 18441370] 
5. MacLaren RE, Groppe M, Barnard AR, et al. Retinal gene therapy in patients with choroideremia: 
initial findings from a phase 1/2 clinical trial. Lancet. 2014; 383:1129–1137. [PubMed: 24439297] 
6. Constable IJ, Blumenkranz MS, Schwartz SD, et al. Gene Therapy for Age-Related Macular 
Degeneration. Asia Pac J Ophthalmol (Phila). 2016; 5:300–303. [PubMed: 27488071] 
7. Ran FA, Hsu PD, Lin CY , et al. Double nicking by RNA-guided CRISPR Cas9 for enhanced 
genome editing specificity. Cell. 2013; 154:1380–1389. [PubMed: 23992846] 
8. Jinek M, East A, Cheng A, et al. RNA-programmed genome editing in human cells. Elife. 2013; 
2:e00471. [PubMed: 23386978] 
9. Mali P, Yang L, Esvelt KM, et al. RNA-guided human genome engineering via Cas9. Science. 2013; 
339:823–826. [PubMed: 23287722] 
10. Wiley LA, Burnight ER, Songstad AE, et al. Patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) 
for the study and treatment of retinal degenerative diseases. Prog Retin Eye Res. 2015; 44:15–35. 
[PubMed: 25448922] 
11. Wiley LA, Burnight ER, DeLuca AP, et al. cGMP production of patient-specific iPSCs and 
photoreceptor precursor cells to treat retinal degenerative blindness. Sci Rep. 2016; 6:30742. 
[PubMed: 27471043] 
12. Lander ES, Linton LM, Birren B, et al. Initial sequencing and analysis of the human genome. 
Nature. 2001; 409:860–921. [PubMed: 11237011] 
13. Venter JC, Adams MD, Myers EW, et al. The sequence of the human genome. Science. 2001; 
291:1304–1351. [PubMed: 11181995] 
14. Cideciyan A V , Swider M, Aleman TS, et al. Reduced-illuminance autofluorescence imaging in 
ABCA4-associated retinal degenerations. J Opt Soc Am A Opt Image Sci Vis. 2007; 24:1457–
1467. [PubMed: 17429493] 
15. McCulloch DL, Marmor MF, Brigell MG, et al. ISCEV Standard for full-field clinical 
electroretinography (2015 update). Doc Ophthalmol. 2015; 130:1–12.
16. Stone EM. Leber congenital amaurosis - a model for efficient genetic testing of heterogeneous 
disorders: LXIV Edward Jackson Memorial Lecture. Am J Ophthalmol. 2007; 144:791–811. 
[PubMed: 17964524] 
17. Newton CR, Graham A, Heptinstall LE, et al. Analysis of any point mutation in DNA. The 
amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS). Nucleic Acids Res. 1989; 17:2503–2516. 
[PubMed: 2785681] 
18. Stone EM. Finding and interpreting genetic variations that are important to ophthalmologists. Trans 
Am Ophthalmol Soc. 2003; 101:437–484. [PubMed: 14971589] 
19. Li H, Durbin R. Fast and accurate long-read alignment with Burrows-Wheeler transform. 
Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:589–595. [PubMed: 20080505] 
20. DePristo MA, Banks E, Poplin R, et al. A framework for variation discovery and genotyping using 
next-generation DNA sequencing data. Nat Genet. 2011; 43:491–498. [PubMed: 21478889] 
21. Krumm N, Sudmant PH, Ko A, et al. Copy number variation detection and genotyping from exome 
sequence data. Genome Research. 2012; 22:1525–1532. [PubMed: 22585873] 
22. Chen X, Schulz-Trieglaff O, Shaw R, et al. Manta: rapid detection of structural variants and indels 
for germline and cancer sequencing applications. Bioinformatics. 2016; 32:1220–1222. [PubMed: 
26647377] 
23. Lek M, Karczewski KJ, Minikel EV , et al. Analysis of protein-coding genetic variation in 60,706 
humans. Nature. 2016; 536:285–291. [PubMed: 27535533] 
24. Lott MT, Leipzig JN, Derbeneva O, et al. mtDNA Variation and Analysis Using Mitomap and 
Mitomaster. Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. 2013; 44:1, 23, 1–26. [PubMed: 25489354] 
25. Weleber RG, Michaelides M, Trzupek KM, et al. The Phenotype of Severe Early Childhood Onset 
Retinal Dystrophy (SECORD) from Mutation of RPE65and Differentiation from Leber Congenital 
Amaurosis. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011; 52:292–302. [PubMed: 20811047] Stone et al. Page 17
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript26. Genead MA, Fishman GA, Stone EM, Allikmets R. The natural history of stargardt disease with 
specific sequence mutation in the ABCA4 gene. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009; 50:5867–5871. 
[PubMed: 19578016] 
27. Population by sex and selected age groups: 2000 and 2010. United States Census Bureau. Available 
at: https://www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br-03.pdf
28. Braun TA, Mullins RF, Wagner AH, et al. Non-exomic and synonymous variants in ABCA4 are an 
important cause of Stargardt disease. Hum Mol Genet. 2013; 22:5136–5145. [PubMed: 23918662] 
29. Tucker BA, Mullins RF, Streb LM, et al. Patient-specific iPSC-derived photoreceptor precursor 
cells as a means to investigate retinitis pigmentosa. Elife. 2013; 2:e00824. [PubMed: 23991284] 
30. Khan SY , Ali S, Naeem MA, et al. Splice-site mutations identified in PDE6A responsible for 
retinitis pigmentosa in consanguineous Pakistani families. Mol Vis. 2015; 21:871–882. [PubMed: 
26321862] 
31. Bellingham J, Davidson AE, Aboshiha J, et al. Investigation of Aberrant Splicing Induced by 
AIPL1 Variations as a Cause of Leber Congenital Amaurosis. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2015; 
56:7784–7793. [PubMed: 26650897] 
32. den Hollander AI, Koenekoop RK, Yzer S, et al. Mutations in the CEP290 (NPHP6) gene are a 
frequent cause of Leber congenital amaurosis. Am J Hum Genet. 2006; 79:556–561. [PubMed: 
16909394] 
33. Small KW, DeLuca AP, Whitmore SS, et al. North Carolina Macular Dystrophy Is Caused by 
Dysregulation of the Retinal Transcription Factor PRDM13. Ophthalmology. 2016; 123:9–18. 
[PubMed: 26507665] 
34. Howell N, Bindoff LA, McCullough DA, et al. Leber hereditary optic neuropathy: identification of 
the same mitochondrial ND1 mutation in six pedigrees. Am J Hum Genet. 1991; 49:939–950. 
[PubMed: 1928099] 
35. van den Ouweland JM, Lemkes HH, Gerbitz KD, Maassen JA. Maternally inherited diabetes and 
deafness (MIDD): a distinct subtype of diabetes associated with a mitochondrial tRNA(Leu)
(UUR) gene point mutation. Muscle Nerve Suppl. 1995; 3:S124–30. [PubMed: 7603513] 
36. Vervoort R, Lennon A, Bird AC, et al. Mutational hot spot within a new RPGR exon in X-linked 
retinitis pigmentosa. Nat Genet. 2000; 25:462–466. [PubMed: 10932196] 
37. Ayyagari R, Demirci FY , Liu J, et al. X-linked recessive atrophic macular degeneration from RPGR 
mutation. Genomics. 2002; 80:166–171. [PubMed: 12160730] 
38. Yang Z, Peachey NS, Moshfeghi DM, et al. Mutations in the RPGR gene cause X-linked cone 
dystrophy. Hum Mol Genet. 2002; 11:605–611. [PubMed: 11875055] 
39. Schindler EI, Nylen EL, Ko AC, et al. Deducing the pathogenic contribution of recessive ABCA4 
alleles in an outbred population. Hum Mol Genet. 2010; 19:3693–3701. [PubMed: 20647261] 
40. Tucker BA, Scheetz TE, Mullins RF, et al. Exome sequencing and analysis of induced pluripotent 
stem cells identify the cilia-related gene male germ cell-associated kinase (MAK) as a cause of 
retinitis pigmentosa. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011; 108:E569–76. [PubMed: 21825139] 
41. Fromer M, Purcell SM. Using XHMM Software to Detect Copy Number Variation in Whole-
Exome Sequencing Data. Curr Protoc Hum Genet. 2014; 81:7, 23, 1–21. [PubMed: 24763994] 
42. Suzuki T, Tsurusaki Y , Nakashima M, et al. Precise detection of chromosomal translocation or 
inversion breakpoints by whole-genome sequencing. J Hum Genet. 2014; 59:649–654. [PubMed: 
25296578] 
43. Wildschutte JH, Baron A, Diroff NM, Kidd JM. Discovery and characterization of Alu repeat 
sequences via precise local read assembly. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015; 43:10292–10307. [PubMed: 
26503250] 
44. Merico D, Roifman M, Braunschweig U, et al. Compound heterozygous mutations in the 
noncoding RNU4ATAC cause Roifman Syndrome by disrupting minor intron splicing. Nat 
Commun. 2015; 6:8718. [PubMed: 26522830] 
45. Känsäkoski J, Jääskeläinen J, Jääskeläinen T, et al. Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome 
caused by a deep intronic pseudoexon-activating mutation in the androgen receptor gene. Sci Rep. 
2016; 6:32819. [PubMed: 27609317] 
46. Tucker BA, Cranston CM, Anfinson KA, et al. Using patient-specific induced pluripotent stem 
cells to interrogate the pathogenicity of a novel retinal pigment epithelium-specific 65 kDa cryptic Stone et al. Page 18
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptsplice site mutation and confirm eligibility for enrollment into a clinical gene augmentation trial. 
Transl Res. 2015; 166:740–749.e1. [PubMed: 26364624] 
47. Dryja TP, Hahn LB, Kajiwara K, Berson EL. Dominant and digenic mutations in the 
peripherin/RDS and ROM1 genes in retinitis pigmentosa. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 1997; 
38:1972–1982. [PubMed: 9331261] 
48. Kajiwara K, Berson EL, Dryja TP. Digenic retinitis pigmentosa due to mutations at the unlinked 
peripherin/RDS and ROM1 loci. Science. 1994; 264:1604–1608. [PubMed: 8202715] 
49. Tucker BA, Cranston C, Anfinson KR, et al. Using patient specific iPSCs to interrogate the 
pathogenicity of a novel RPE65 cryptic splice site mutation and confirm eligibility for enrollment 
into a clinical gene augmentation trial. Transl Res. Dec; 2015 166(6):740–749.e1. [PubMed: 
26364624] Stone et al. Page 19
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFigure 1. Distribution of patients and molecular findings across all levels of the clinical 
classification system
The structure of the classification system is shown at left with the common clinical terms for 
each phenotypic group shown in the adjacent column. The Total  column provides the 
number of probands assigned to each clinical group, while the Solved  column shows the 
number of probands in each group with a disease-causing genotype identified. The Genes 
columns provide the number of genes that have been observed to cause the diseases of that 
clinical group in the published literature and/or at the University of Iowa. The false genotype 
rate ( FGR ) columns give the percentage of normal individuals that would be expected to 
harbor a plausible disease-causing complete genotype by chance in any of the genes 
assigned to each clinical category in the published literature and/or at the University of Iowa. 
PV is the average number of plausible disease-causing variants one would expect to observe 
in a normal individual by chance in any of the genes assigned to each clinical category in the 
published literature. The bar lengths represent the percent of solved cases for each clinical 
category while the alternating shades represent the proportional contributions of each gene 
in descending order. Gene names are given for any genes that cause at least 15% of the 
disease in a given category. Blue bars indicate categories with an FGR less than 5% while 
grey bars indicate categories with an FGR greater than or equal to 5%. Abbreviations: AD, 
Autosomal Dominant; ADNIV , Autosomal Dominant Neovascular Inflammatory Stone et al. Page 20
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptVitreoretinopathy; AR, Autosomal Recessive; CSNB, Congenital Stationary Night 
Blindness; CSSD, Congenital Stationary Synaptic Dysfunction; DDND, Developmental 
Delay and/or Neuromuscular Degeneration; ECORD, Early Childhood Onset Retinal 
Dystrophy; EV , Erosive Vitreoretinopathy; FEVR, Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy; 
HMA, Homocystinuria with Macular Atrophy; HPCD, Helicoid Peripapillary Chorioretinal 
Degeneration; LHON, Leber Hereditary Optic Neuropathy; MCLMR, Microcephaly 
Congenital Lymphedema and Chorioretinopathy; MIDD, Maternally Inherited Diabetes and 
Deafness; SECORD, Severe Early Childhood Onset Retinal Dystrophy; XL, X-linked.Stone et al. Page 21
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFigure 2. Graphical depiction of the distribution of 1,000 consecutive probands among the larger 
diagnostic categories
The center chart indicates the proportion of probands assigned to each of the three main 
branches of the classification system. The outer charts show the fraction of probands 
assigned to the larger diagnostic categories within each branch.Stone et al. Page 22
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFigure 3. Distribution of the number of probands per gene
Thirteen genes each caused disease in 1% or more of the probands in this study (left of 
dashed vertical line) while the other 91 each caused disease in less than 1%. These data are 
presented in more detail in Table 3.Stone et al. Page 23
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFigure 4. Financial cost and diagnostic yield of tiered testing strategy
Patients are ordered from lowest cost to highest cost with colors representing the component 
costs our currently recommended series of genetic tests for each clinical category. A black 
bar beneath a patient indicates that a causative genotype was discovered in this individual. 
The horizontal lines highlight the higher cost of uniform whole exome sequencing ( upper 
line) as compared to the average cost of clinically-focused individualized tests ( lower line ).Stone et al. Page 24
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFigure 5. Statistical cost
The false genotype rate (FGR) is the average number of complete genotypes one would 
expect to observe by chance in a healthy individual in a specified genomic space, based on 
data from 60,000 normal individuals 23. The probands in this study are shown ordered 
according to the FGR associated with their clinical category (see Figure 1). The red line 
indicates the FGR associated with the genes observed to cause disease in this cohort (see 
also Supplemental Figure 2). The dashed line indicates an FGR of 5% (i.e., the threshold at 
which one in 20 people would be expected to harbor a plausibly pathogenic, complete 
genotype by chance). The black bars  at the bottom of the figure indicate that a disease-
causing genotype was identified in this proband. Assessing the coding sequences of all 301 
non-mitochondrial genes in all probands ( green line ) would result in an average FGR of 
128% (i.e., these probands would be expected to harbor an average of 1.28 plausible, 
complete genotypes by chance).Stone et al. Page 25
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFigure 6. A 47-year-old male with RPGR -associated X-linked cone dystrophy. A
Fundus photograph of the right eye. B: Optical coherence tomogram of the right eye. C: 
Goldmann visual field of the right eye.Stone et al. Page 26
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFigure 7. An 8-year-old male with choroideremia. A
Fundus photograph of the right eye. B: Goldmann visual field of the right eye.Stone et al. Page 27
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFigure 8. A 48-year-old female with maternally inherited diabetes and deafness. A
Fundus photograph of the right eye. B: Fundus photograph of the left eye. C-D:  Fundus 
autofluorescence images of both the right eye ( C) and left eye ( D).Stone et al. Page 28
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFigure 9. A 10-year-old female with ABCA4 -associated Stargardt disease. A
Fundus photograph of the right eye. B: Optical coherence tomogram of the right eye. C: 
Goldmann visual field of the right eye.Stone et al. Page 29
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFigure 10. A 42-year-old male with ABCA4 -associated Stargardt disease. A
Fundus photograph of the right eye. B: Optical coherence tomogram of the right eye. C: 
Goldmann visual field of the right eye.Stone et al. Page 30
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptAuthor Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptStone et al. Page 31
Table 1
List of abbreviations and acronyms
Abbreviation Definition
AD Autosomal Dominant
ADNIV Autosomal Dominant Neovascular Inflammatory Vitreoretinopathy
AR Autosomal Recessive
AR -1 Autosomal Recessive - 1 Allele Identified
ARMS Amplification Refractory Mutation System
AZOOR Acute Zonal Occult Outer Retinopathy
BBS Bardet-Biedl Syndrome
CRISPR Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats
CSNB Congential Stationary Night Blindness
CSSD Congenital Stationary Synaptic Dysfunction
DDND Developmental Delay and/or Neuromuscular Degeneration;
ECORD Early Childhood Onset Retinal Dystrophy
ERG Electroretinogram
EV Erosive Vitreoretinopathy
ExAC Exome Aggregation Consortium
FEVR Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy
FGR False Genotype Rate
HMA Homocystinuria with Macular Atrophy
HPCD Helicoid Peripapillary Chorioretinal Degeneration
ISCEV International Society for Clinical Electrophysiology of Vision
IVS Intervening Sequence
L/M Opsin Long/Medium Wave Length Opsin
LCA Leber Congenital Amaurosis
LCHAD Long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-coenzyme A Dehydrogenase Deficiency
LHON Leber Hereditary Optic Neuropathy
MCLMR Microcephaly Congenital Lymphedema and Chorioretinopathy
MDPD Mutation Detection Probability Distribution
MIDD Maternally Inherited Diabetes and Deafness
MIS Missense
Mito Mitochondrial
NGS Next Generation Sequencing
PCR Polymerase Chain Reaction
PV Plausible Variants
RP Retinitis Pigmentosa
RPE Retinal Pigment Epithelial
SECORD Severe Early Childhood Onset Retinal Dystrophy
TERM Terminating
VVD Vision Variation Database
XL X-Linked
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptStone et al. Page 32
Table 2
Inherited retinal disease categories.
I – Photoreceptor Disease
 A – Isolated
  1 – Acquired/Progressive
   a – Retinitis Pigmentosa
    i – X-linked
    ii – Autosomal Dominant
    iii – Autosomal Recessive
    iv – Other Multiplex
   b – Cone and Cone Rod Dystrophy
    i – X-linked
    ii – Autosomal Dominant
    iii – Autosomal Recessive
    iv – Other Multiplex
  2 – Congenital/Stationary
   a – LCA
   b – SECORD
   c – ECORD
   d – Achromatopsia (Congenital Stationary Cone Dysfunction)
   e – Blue Cone Monochromacy
   f – Congenital Stationary Night Blindness
    i – X-linked
    ii – Autosomal Dominant
    iii – Autosomal Recessive with normal fundus
    iv – Enhanced S-cone Syndrome
    v – Fundus Albipunctatus
    vi – Oguchi Disease
   g – Congenital Stationary Synaptic Dysfunction
   h – Delayed Retinal Maturation
 B – Syndromic
  1 – Usher Syndrome
   a – Type I
   b – Type II
   c – Type III
  2 – Bardet-Biedl Syndrome
  3 – Neuronal Ceroid Lipofucinosis
  4 – Senior-Loken Syndrome
  5 – Joubert Syndrome
  6 – Microcephaly Congenital Lymphedema and Chorioretinopathy
  7 – Retinitis Pigmentosa with Ataxia
  8 – Peroxisomal Biogenesis Disorders
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptStone et al. Page 33
  9 – Cohen Syndrome
II – Macular Diseases
 A – Autosomal Recessive Stargardt Disease
 B – Best Disease
 C – Pattern Dystrophy
 D – Autosomal Dominant Stargardt Disease
 E – Sorsby Fundus Dystrophy
 F – Malattia Leventinese
 G – North Carolina Macular Dystrophy
 H – Syndromic Macular Diseases
  1 – Macular Dystrophy, Diabetes and Deafness
  2 – Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum
  3 – Homocystinuria with Macular Atrophy
  4 – Spinocerebellar Atrophy
I – Benign Fleck Retina
III – Third Branch Disorders
 A – Choroidopathies
  1 – Choroideremia
  2 – Gyrate Atrophy
  3 – Late Onset Retinal Dystrophy
  4 – Nummular Choroidal Atrophy
  5 – Helicoid Peripapillary Chorioretinal Degeneration
 B – Retinoschisis
  1 – X-linked
  2 – Recessive
 C – Optic Neuropathies
  1 – Nonsyndromic
   a – Autosomal Dominant
   b – Autosomal Recessive
   c – Leber Hereditary Optic Neuropathy
  2 – Syndromic
   a – Wolfram Syndrome
   b – Hearing Loss
 D – Tumors
  1 – von Hippel Lindau
  2 – Retinoblastoma
  3 – Tuberous Sclerosis
  4 – Gardner Syndrome
 E – Vitreoretinopathies
  1 – Stickler Syndrome
  2 – Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy
   a – Norrie Disease
   b – Autosomal Dominant
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptStone et al. Page 34
  3 – AD Neovascular Inflammatory Vitreoretinopathy
  4 – Wagner Disease (Erosive Vitreoretinopathy)
  5 – Knobloch Syndrome
  6 – Heritable Vascular Tortuosity
   a – Autosomal Dominant Retinal Vascular Tortuosity
   b – Cerebroretinal Vasculopathy
   c – Fascioscapulohumeral Dystrophy
 F – Albinism
  1 – X-linked Ocular Albinism
  2 – Oculocutaneous Albinism
   a – Nonsyndromic
   b – Hermansky Pudlak
   c – Chediak Higashi
 G – Isolated Foveal Hypoplasia
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptStone et al. Page 35
Table 3
Estimate of the total number of people of all ages in the United States with mutations in genes observed in this 
study.
Gene No. in Cohort Freq. in U.S. No. in U.S. New Cases per Year
ABCA4 173 1 / 10,000 32,440 404
USH2A 76 1 / 22,763 14,251 177
RPGR 48 1 / 36,042 9,001 112
RHO 34 1 / 50,882 6,376 79
PRPH2 32 1 / 54,062 6,000 75
BEST1 25 1 / 69,200 4,688 58
CRB1 20 1 / 86,500 3,750 47
BBS1 19 1 / 91,053 3,563 44
CEP290 18 1 / 96,111 3,375 42
PRPF31 15 1 / 115,333 2,813 35
CHM 14 1 / 123,571 2,625 33
RS1 13 1 / 133,077 2,438 30
RP1 10 1 / 173,000 1,875 23
FAM161A 9 1 / 192,222 1,688 21
MYO7A 8 1 / 216,250 1,500 19
OPA1 8 1 / 216,250 1,500 19
PCDH15 8 1 / 216,250 1,500 19
RP2 8 1 / 216,250 1,500 19
GUCA1A 7 1 / 247,143 1,313 16
IMPG2 7 1 / 247,143 1,313 16
MAK 7 1 / 247,143 1,313 16
PDE6B 7 1 / 247,143 1,313 16
EYS 6 1 / 288,333 1,125 14
PROM1 6 1 / 288,333 1,125 14
RDH12 6 1 / 288,333 1,125 14
CLN3 5 1 / 346,000 938 12
CNGB3 5 1 / 346,000 938 12
IQCB1 5 1 / 346,000 938 12
NR2E3 5 1 / 346,000 938 12
VHL 5 1 / 346,000 938 12
BBS2 4 1 / 432,500 750 9
CACNA1F 4 1 / 432,500 750 9
CDH23 4 1 / 432,500 750 9
CDHR1 4 1 / 432,500 750 9
FLVCR1 4 1 / 432,500 750 9
GUCY2D 4 1 / 432,500 750 9
KIF11 4 1 / 432,500 750 9
KLHL7 4 1 / 432,500 750 9
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptStone et al. Page 36
Gene No. in Cohort Freq. in U.S. No. in U.S. New Cases per Year
NMNAT1 4 1 / 432,500 750 9
BBS10 3 1 / 576,667 563 7
CERKL 3 1 / 576,667 563 7
CNGA3 3 1 / 576,667 563 7
COL2A1 3 1 / 576,667 563 7
CRX 3 1 / 576,667 563 7
ELOVL4 3 1 / 576,667 563 7
IFT140 3 1 / 576,667 563 7
INPP5E 3 1 / 576,667 563 7
L/M Opsin Cluster 3 1 / 576,667 563 7
MERTK 3 1 / 576,667 563 7
MT-TL1 3 1 / 576,667 563 7
PRPF8 3 1 / 576,667 563 7
RPE65 3 1 / 576,667 563 7
VPS13B 3 1 / 576,667 563 7
ABCC6 2 1 / 865,000 375 5
ACO2 2 1 / 865,000 375 5
ADGRV1 2 1 / 865,000 375 5
CNGB1 2 1 / 865,000 375 5
DHDDS 2 1 / 865,000 375 5
IMPDH1 2 1 / 865,000 375 5
KCNV2 2 1 / 865,000 375 5
MKKS 2 1 / 865,000 375 5
NYX 2 1 / 865,000 375 5
PEX1 2 1 / 865,000 375 5
PPT1 2 1 / 865,000 375 5
PRDM13 2 1 / 865,000 375 5
PRPF3 2 1 / 865,000 375 5
RPGRIP1 2 1 / 865,000 375 5
SNRNP200 2 1 / 865,000 375 5
TIMP3 2 1 / 865,000 375 5
TRNT1 2 1 / 865,000 375 5
TRPM1 2 1 / 865,000 375 5
USH1C 2 1 / 865,000 375 5
WDR19 2 1 / 865,000 375 5
ZNF408 2 1 / 865,000 375 5
ABHD12 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
AIPL1 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
ATXN7 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
BBS9 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
CABP4 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
CEP78 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptStone et al. Page 37
Gene No. in Cohort Freq. in U.S. No. in U.S. New Cases per Year
CLRN1 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
GPR143 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
HADHA 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
IFT172 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
Karyotypic 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
LCA5 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
MAN2B1 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
MFRP 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
MFSD8 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
MT-ND4 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
MT-ND6 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
MTR 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
NDP 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
NPHP1 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
OAT 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
PAX6 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
PEX6 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
PNPLA6 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
POMGNT1 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
RLBP1 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
RPIA 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
SLC24A1 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
TULP1 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
USH1G 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
WFS1 1 1 / 1,730,000 188 2
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptStone et al. Page 38Table 4
Variation Distribution Across Inheritance Types
MIS TERM MIS + MIS MIS + TERM TERM + TERM TOTALS
AD 140 32 - - - 172
XL 20 74 - - - 94
MITO 5 - - - - 5
AR-1 17 15 - - - 32
AR - - 146 160 151 457
TOTALS 182 121 146 160 151 760
AD – Autosomal Dominant
XL – X-Linked
AR-1 – Autosomal Recessive 1-Allele Identified
AR - Autosomal Recessive
MIS = Missense
TERM = Terminating
Ophthalmology . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.