Phagocytosis in the retina promotes local insulin production in 
the eye
J. Iker Etchegaray1,2,3, Shannon Kelley1,2,3, Kristen Penberthy1,2, Laura Karvelyte1,2,3, 
Yosuke Nagasaka4, Sofia Gasperino1,2,3, Soumen Paul5, Vikram Seshadri5, Michael 
Raymond1,2, Ana Royo Marco2, Jonathan Pinney1,2, Marta Stremska2,3, Brady Barron1,2,3, 
Christopher Lucas1,2,6, Nishikant Wase7, Yong Fan8, Emil Unanue3, Bijoy Kundu5, Tal 
Burstyn-Cohen9, Justin Perry10, Jayakrishna Ambati4,11, Kodi S. Ravichandran1,2,9,12, ✉
1Center for Cell Clearance, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA
2Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Cancer Biology, University of Virginia, 
Charlottesville, VA, USA
3Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO, USA
4Center for Advanced Vision Science, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA
5Department of Radiology and Medical Imaging, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA
6University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
7Biomolecular Analysis Facility, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA
8Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, USA
9Hadassah Medical School, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
10Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA
11Ophthalmology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA
✉Correspondence and requests for materials  should be addressed to Kodi S. Ravichandran, kodi@wustl.edu.
Author contributions
J.I.E. and K.S.R. designed all experiments and wrote and composed the manuscript. J.I.E. performed most of the experiments. 
S.K. performed all immunoblots. K.P. performed RNA-seq of MerTK KO mice. L.K. assisted with eye dissections. Y .N. and J.A. 
conducted ERG experiments. S.G. provided input and generated figures. S.P., V .S. and B.K. carried out PET experiments. M.R., C.L. 
and E.U. provided conceptual advice and/or helped with specific experiments. A.R.M. helped with the RPE phagocytosis assay. J. 
Pinney analyzed RNA-seq data and mined public datasets. M.S. assisted with ELISAs. B.B. performed glucose tolerance assays. N.W. 
performed metabolomics. Y .F. provided Ins2f/f mice. T.B.-C. conducted mouse insulin immunofluorescence assays. J. Perry analyzed 
metabolomics data and gave conceptual advice.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Extended data  is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00728-0 .
Supplementary information  The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s42255-022-00728-0 .
Peer review information  Nature Metabolism  thanks the anonymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. 
Primary Handling Editor: Christoph Schmitt in collaboration with the Nature Metabolism  team.
Reprints and permissions information  is available at www.nature.com/reprints .
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Metab . 2023 February ; 5(2): 207–218. doi:10.1038/s42255-022-00728-0.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript12VIB/UGent Inflammation Research Centre, and Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium
Abstract
The retina is highly metabolically active, relying on glucose uptake and aerobic glycolysis. 
Situated in close contact to photoreceptors, a key function of cells in the retinal pigment 
epithelium (RPE) is phagocytosis of damaged photoreceptor outer segments (POS). Here we 
identify RPE as a local source of insulin in the eye that is stimulated by POS phagocytosis. 
We show that Ins2 messenger RNA and insulin protein are produced by RPE cells and that this 
production correlates with RPE phagocytosis of POS. Genetic deletion of phagocytic receptors 
(‘loss of function’) reduces Ins2, whereas increasing the levels of the phagocytic receptor MerTK 
(‘gain of function’) increases Ins2 production in male mice. Contrary to pancreas-derived systemic 
insulin, RPE-derived local insulin is stimulated during starvation, which also increases RPE 
phagocytosis. Global or RPE-specific Ins2 gene deletion decreases retinal glucose uptake in 
starved male mice, dysregulates retinal physiology, causes defects in phototransduction and 
exacerbates photoreceptor loss in a mouse model of retinitis pigmentosa. Collectively, these 
data identify RPE cells as a phagocytosis-induced local source of insulin in the retina, with the 
potential to influence retinal physiology and disease.
In the retina, a group of RPE cells reside in close apposition to the photoreceptors 
to form the outer blood–retinal barrier. The RPE critically contributes to photoreceptor 
metabolic homeostasis in multiple ways; taking up glucose from circulation and passing 
it to photoreceptors, and to allow glucose ‘pass-through’, RPE cells express GLUT1, a 
glucose transporter, on both basolateral and apical membranes1,2. Photoreceptors are highly 
metabolically active and glucose is almost entirely metabolized through aerobic glycolysis3. 
RPE cells also have a specialized metabolism that utilizes lactate, the by-product of aerobic 
glycolysis by the photoreceptors2. Lack of proper glucose uptake by the retina can impair 
vision and contribute to diseases such as retinitis pigmentosa4–6.
RPE performs another critical function in retinal physiology: phagocytosis of photoreceptors 
that undergo damage during the day due to light. The RPE uptake of POS is circadian 
regulated and starts around dawn/light onset7. The ingested POS also fuel RPE and retina 
metabolism8,9. Mer tyrosine kinase (MerTK)-dependent POS phagocytosis not only spares 
glucose from being consumed by the RPE8, but upregulates GLUT1 (ref. 9) to allow more 
glucose to be taken up from circulation into the retina; however, the mechanisms by which 
POS phagocytosis modulates retina metabolism directly are still poorly understood.
Insulin is a peptide hormone produced by the pancreas upon feeding and promotes uptake 
of glucose (and other metabolic substrates) by tissues. Although lack of pancreatic insulin 
contributes to diseases of the retina10 the role of circulating insulin on signaling within 
the retina is less clear. Indeed, multiple lines of research have shown the retina to be 
‘insensitive’ to systemic insulin; injection of insulin into the portal vein of rats leads to 
insulin receptor (InsR) phosphorylation in muscle but not in the retina11. Radioactively 
labeled insulin (injected directly into the cilioretinal artery of cows) does not cross into the 
retina12 and insulin protein levels and InsR phosphorylation in the retina of rats does not Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 2
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptchange, regardless of whether the animal has been fed or fasted11,13. Additionally, ablating 
pancreatic insulin does not change retinal insulin protein levels and instead, leads to an 
increase in glucose levels within the eye14. Paradoxically, however, research has shown that 
InsR signaling in the retina is crucial to homeostasis15.
Here, we discover phagocytosis by the RPE as a trigger for local insulin generation in the 
retina, especially under conditions of nutrient scarcity/starvation when systemic insulin is 
low and this RPE-derived insulin promotes retinal glucose uptake and retinal homeostasis.
RPE as a source of insulin in the eye
MerTK is a key tyrosine kinase receptor, expressed by the RPE, involved in phagocytosis of 
photoreceptors and retinal homeostasis16,17. Previously, we observed transgenic expression 
of another phagocytic receptor (BAI1) cannot rescue retinal degeneration in MerTK 
knockout (KO) mice18, in part due to unique gene signatures induced by MerTK. Re-
analyzing the RNA-seq dataset18, we noted that one of the down-regulated genes in 
RPE from MerTK knockout mice was Ins2, which encodes insulin (Fig. 1a). Mice have 
two insulin-encoding genes Ins1 and Ins2, both expressed in the pancreas19. In our RPE 
RNAseq dataset, Ins1 was undetectable in wild-type (WT) and MerTK KO mice. We did 
not detect altered expression of other factors linked to growth and metabolism, such as 
insulin-like growth factor-1, insulin-like growth factor-2, transforming growth factor (TGF)-
β1, TGF- β2 or TGF- β3, vascular endothelial growth factor or fibroblast growth factor (Fig. 
1a). Comparing Ins2 expression among different tissues, the eye had the second highest 
expression after the pancreas (Fig. 1b and Extended Data Fig. 1a). The thymus expresses 
Ins2 as part of establishing T-cell tolerance to insulin20 and thymic Ins2 levels were lower 
than the eye.
When we compared Ins2 expression in purified RPE versus the whole retina, Ins2 was 
predominantly expressed in the RPE (Fig. 1c). Notably, expression of Ins2 was detectable 
in purified and cultured primary RPE ex vivo (devoid of other cell types); in contrast, Ins2 
was undetectable in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (Fig. 1d). Further, in situ hybridization 
(RNAScope) showed Ins2 expression primarily in the RPE with little expression in the rest 
of retina (Fig. 1e).
To further confirm RPE expression of Ins2, we crossed YFP-reporter mice to Best1- Cre 
mice (where the Cre recombinase is expressed under the Bestrophin1  promoter). As 
Best1- Cre expression is not 100% penetrant within the RPE population1,21, we purified 
YFP-expressing RPE cells via flow cytometry, isolated their nuclei and performed PCR 
with reverse transcription (RT–PCR) (Extended Data Fig. 1b)21. Ins2 expression was readily 
detected in the purified RPE nuclei, comparable to MerTK  (Fig. 1f). In the same conditions, 
rhodopsin , a photoreceptor-specific gene18, was undetectable (Fig. 1f). Further, purified RPE 
only expressed Ins2 (not Ins1) (Fig. 1c).
To genetically ablate Ins2 gene expression in the RPE, we crossed mice carrying floxed 
Ins2 alleles (Ins2f/f) with Best1 -Cre. Despite Best1- Cre expression in the RPE being not 
fully penetrant (refs. 1,21 and Extended Data Fig. 1b), RPE from Best1 -Cre Ins2f/f mice Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 3
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscripthad decreased Ins2 mRNA (Fig. 1g). As control, we crossed Ins2f/f mice to rhodopsin 
promoter driven-Cre ( Rhod -Cre), targeting the photoreceptors. RPE from Rhod -Cre Ins2f/f 
mice did not show a decrease in Ins2 (Extended Data Fig. 1c), confirming RPE-specific Ins2 
expression.
At the protein level, insulin was detected by ELISA using protein extracts from purified 
RPE (Fig. 1h); further, immunofluorescence on retinal sections revealed insulin protein 
within the RPE (Fig. 1h). To assess insulin secretion by the RPE, we measured C-peptide 
2, a by-product of proinsulin processing that gets co-released with insulin and is used as a 
common metric for insulin release22. Supernatants of isolated eye cups ex vivo contained 
C-peptide 2 (Fig. 1i). Further, treatment with potassium chloride (KCl), an inducer of 
pancreatic insulin release, enhanced C-peptide 2 levels in the eye cup supernatants (Fig. 1i). 
These data revealed that RPE can produce and release insulin.
We also examined insulin expression in the RPE of primates via different approaches. 
Mining an existing macaque retinal single-cell RNA-seq data indicated Ins mRNA in 
the RPE and RPE ‘like’ cells23 (Extended Data Fig. 2). Further, insulin expression was 
detectable in the RPE of human retinal sections (Fig. 1j). C-peptide was also detected 
in the human retina (Extended Data Fig. 1d). These multiple orthogonal pieces of data 
demonstrated RPE as a source of Ins2 mRNA and insulin protein in the eye.
RPE insulin is regulated differently from systemic insulin
While pancreatic insulin release is induced by feeding, both Ins1 and Ins2 transcript levels 
plummet during starvation24,25, leading to a decrease in circulating/systemic insulin26. 
Using mice fed normally or starved for 10–14 h, we isolated blood, retina and RPE to 
analyze C-peptide and Ins2 mRNA (Fig. 2a). Starvation caused C-peptide levels to drop 
in the blood, yet C-peptide in the retina remained stable (Fig. 2b). Further, Ins2 mRNA 
increased 4-6-fold in the RPE under nutrient-poor conditions (Fig. 2b) contrasting with 
pancreatic Ins1 and Ins2 (refs. 25,27).
To confirm these observations genetically, we used global Ins2 knockout mice (which avoids 
partial deletion in the Best1-Cre-Ins2f/f mice). Previous studies have shown that global 
Ins2 KO  mice have no defects in systemic blood insulin due to continued expression 
of Ins1 in the pancreas28,29. RPE from Ins2 KO mice lacked Ins2 mRNA (Fig. 2c), 
without a compensatory increase in Ins1 (Extended Data Fig. 3a). Consistent with previous 
reports28,29, Ins2 KO mice showed no defects in glucose tolerance test (readout of insulin 
function) or circulating C-peptide levels (Fig. 2d). When we analyzed the interphotoreceptor 
matrix (IPM), the extracellular space between the RPE and the retina30, C-peptide was 
detectable in control mice during starvation and this was lost in the Ins2 KO (Fig. 2e). 
Further, in protein lysates from purified RPE, C-peptide was detected by ELISA in control 
mice but not Ins2 KO mice (Fig. 2e). These data demonstrate that RPE-dependent local 
insulin generation in the eye is due to Ins2 and is regulated independently of systemic 
(pancreatic) insulin.Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 4
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptInsulin binds to the insulin receptor (InsR), triggering InsR phosphorylation and 
upregulation of the glucose transporter type 4 (GLUT4). To probe whether RPE-derived 
insulin could signal to the retina, we measured InsR phosphorylation and GLUT4 
upregulation in the retina of control and Ins2 KO mice under fed or conditions when 
systemic insulin is low (starved). InsR phosphorylation was comparable between control 
and Ins2 KO mice under fed conditions; however, under starved conditions, InsR 
phosphorylation as well as GLUT4 were still detectable in the control retina; importantly, 
this signal was lost in Ins2 KO mice (Fig. 2f). Thus, RPE-derived insulin promotes insulin 
signaling in the retina when circulating insulin is low. We observed no difference between 
control and Ins2 KO mice in InsR phosphorylation in muscle and adipose tissues (Extended 
Data Fig. 3b).
As another approach, we treated mice with streptozotocin (STZ), which causes loss of 
pancreatic β-cells (thereby inducing diabetes) and examined their retinas (Extended Data 
Fig. 4a). Despite hyperglycemia at 4 weeks after STZ treatment (blood glucose levels of 
>600 mg dl−1 and minimal circulating C-peptide levels, Extended Data Fig. 4b), there was 
comparable InsR phosphorylation in the retina of untreated and STZ-treated WT mice, in 
fed or starved states. Further, STZ-treated Ins2 KO mice had lower InsR phosphorylation 
(Extended Data Fig. 4c) (the residual InsR phosphorylation may arise from light-induced 
InsR auto-phosphorylation that is insulin-independent31). While the STZ data are consistent 
with the observations above, we interpret this cautiously, as reports suggests that STZ-
induced hyperglycemia can impact retinal homeostasis10,32.
Phagocytosis upregulates insulin expression by the RPE
RPE-mediated phagocytosis of the POS (around light onset) is necessary for photoreceptor 
homeostasis33, as it removes damaged photoreceptors from the previous day8,9. To test 
whether Ins2 expression in the RPE might be linked to phagocytosis, we first asked whether 
starvation impacts RPE phagocytosis. Notably, photoreceptor outer segment internalization 
by the RPE (measured by immunofluorescence on retinal slices) was increased under 
starvation conditions at ~2 h after light onset, correlating with the reported peak of diurnal 
phagocytosis34 (Fig. 3a and Extended Data Fig. 5a). To address this further, we designed and 
optimized a new flow cytometry-based assay to measure in vivo POS phagocytosis by the 
RPE (Fig. 3b) that enables scoring thousands of RPE cells for phagocytosed photoreceptor-
derived rhodopsin. Starvation/was not due to impaired rhodopsin degradation, as rhodopsin 
degradation by RPE occurred normally at different time points after light onset (Extended 
Data Fig. 5b).
Phagocytosis of POS by the RPE starts around light onset, peaks 2 h later and declines 
throughout the day34,35. We isolated eyes from mice at different times and quantified Ins2 
mRNA in the RPE (Fig. 3c). Ins2 mRNA closely mirrored phagocytosis kinetics, with 
insulin increasing around light onset (6:00 in our vivarium), peaking 2 h after (8:00) and 
declining throughout the day (Fig. 3c). InsR phosphorylation and GLUT4 upregulation also 
changed with time of day, peaking 1 h after light onset (7:00) and declining throughout the 
day (Fig. 3d); however, in Ins2 KO mice, the time of day did not affect InsR phosphorylation Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 5
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptor GLUT4 levels in the retina, linking diurnal changes in signaling with local insulin 
secretion by the RPE.
If RPE phagocytosis were linked to Ins2 induction, we asked whether this would be affected 
by loss of specific phagocytic receptors (Fig. 3e). To test this, we first used mice carrying 
a global deletion of MerTK17,36, a key phagocytic receptor for RPE phagocytosis37 (KO 
strain originally generated by the Lemke group). RPE from the MerTK  KO mice had near 
complete ablation of Ins2 expression (Fig. 3e). Retinas from MerTK  KO mice also trended 
toward lower InsR phosphorylation and significantly decreased GLUT4 and C-peptide levels 
compared to control mice (Extended Data Fig. 5c). As multiple receptors can impact RPE 
phagocytosis, we also tested mice deficient in another phagocytic receptor CD36 (ref. 38). 
RPE from CD36  KO mice also showed decreased Ins2 expression (Fig. 3e). The mice used 
in these studies were of an age when their retinas were morphologically intact without 
retinal damage17.
To complement the above studies, we also used a ‘gain of function’ approach. Cleavage 
of the ectodomain of MerTK on the RPE is one mechanism by which POS phagocytosis 
decreases over time after light onset30. We used a knock-in mouse strain where key cleavage 
residues within MerTK have been modified, rendering it cleavage-resistant (MerTKCR; 
Extended Data Fig. 5d)39. Notably, RPE from MerTKCR mice displayed an increase in 
phagocytosis of POS compared to controls (Fig. 3f) and this correlated with greater Ins2 
expression (Fig. 3f). Testing whether insulin itself might promote RPE phagocytosis, we 
did not detect a difference in RPE phagocytosis between control and Ins2 KO mice 
(Extended Data Fig. 5e), suggesting that insulin production was downstream of POS uptake. 
Collectively, these data demonstrate that phagocytic receptors and diurnally regulated RPE 
phagocytosis promote Ins2 gene expression by the RPE.
Linkage of RPE-derived Ins2 to physiology and disease
The best known physiological effect of insulin on tissues is the stimulation of glucose 
uptake through GLUT4 upregulation9. Induction of local insulin signaling in the retina is 
most pronounced under starved/low systemic insulin conditions; therefore, we measured 
glucose uptake in the eye via positron emission tomography (PET). Specifically, starved WT 
or Ins2 KO mice were intravenously given radiolabeled [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG; a 
non-hydrolysable form of glucose that does not stimulate systemic insulin) and the uptake 
of [18F]FDG was measured in the eye (Fig. 4a). FDG uptake was decreased in the Ins2 
KO mice compared to control mice (Fig. 4a). To further confirm that this reduction in 
glucose uptake was attributable to insulin from the RPE, we imaged Best1 -Cre Ins2f/f mice. 
Again, FDG uptake was decreased in the eyes of Best1 -Cre Ins2f/f mice (Fig. 4a). We also 
performed dynamic PET imaging, which is a qualitative assay performed over time. Using 
this approach, we again saw a decrease in total signal for FDG and glucose uptake was 
also slower when measured over time (Fig. 4b, Supplementary Video 1 and Extended Data 
Fig. 6). To complement PET imaging, we also measured total glucose in the retina of fed 
and starved mice; again, the global Ins2 KO mice and Best1 -Cre Ins2f/f mice exhibited 
decreased total glucose in the retina under starved conditions (Fig. 4c). Notably, when mice 
had been fed ad libitum, glucose levels in the retina did not change compared to control Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 6
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript(Fig. 4c). Thus, RPE-derived insulin influences retinal glucose uptake, a key aspect of retinal 
physiology.
Most of the glucose consumed by photoreceptors is converted to lactate through aerobic 
glycolysis rather than undergoing oxidative phosphorylation3. When we measured lactate 
under starved conditions, total lactate levels in the retina of Ins2 KO mice were significantly 
decreased in both global Ins2 KO and Best1 -Cre Ins2f/f mice compared to controls (Fig. 4d). 
As expected, we did not see a decrease in lactate levels in the retina of mice fed ad libitum 
(Fig. 4d).
To better understand the impact of RPE-derived insulin on metabolic homeostasis of the 
retina, we performed untargeted metabolomics on retinas, as well as on purified RPE from 
control and Ins2 KO mice under starved/low systemic insulin conditions. Retinas of Ins2 
KO mice showed alterations in >40 metabolites compared to control mice (Fig. 5a). Notably, 
many of the metabolites decreased in Ins2 KO retinas are known to be regulated by insulin 
in other insulin-responsive tissues40. Again, lactate came up as a metabolite decreased in 
the retinas of Ins2 KO mice (Fig. 5a,b). Another modified pathway in Ins2 KO mice was 
amino acid metabolism (Extended Data Fig. 7a,b), with the amino acid serine being one 
of the metabolites decreased in Ins2 KO retinas (Fig. 5a,b). Due to high demand for serine 
in neural tissues, glycolysis-derived serine provides the largest contribution to intracellular 
serine stores in the retina41. Strikingly, retinas of starved Ins2 KO mice showed both a 
decrease in serine as well as metabolites that depend on serine for their synthesis, such as 
glycine and folate cycle-derived methionine42 (Fig. 5a,b). Thus, loss of local RPE-derived 
insulin can have a broad impact on retinal metabolism, particularly on metabolites linked to 
retinal homeostasis. Metabolomics of purified RPE from starved WT and Ins2 KO mice did 
not show significant changes in metabolites, suggesting that the RPE-derived insulin may act 
in a paracrine rather than autocrine fashion (Extended Data Fig. 8a–c).
As another test of retinal physiology, we performed electroretinography (ERG) to measure 
electrical changes in the retina in response to light, under fed and starved conditions in 
control and Ins2 KO mice. In the retina, photoreceptor cells synapse onto bipolar cells and 
inhibit their electrical activity under dark conditions; in response to light, photoreceptor 
cells become silenced allowing bipolar cells to become active. This can be observed as the 
a-wave and b-wave, whose amplitude in the electroretinogram is a measure of photoreceptor 
and bipolar cell activity, respectively (Fig. 5c). While the b-wave amplitude in control mice 
remained unchanged in fed versus starved conditions (Fig. 5c), the b-wave amplitude in Ins2 
KO mouse retina significantly increased in starved compared to fed conditions (Fig. 5c). We 
observed no obvious change in a-wave amplitude in control versus Ins2 KO mice (Extended 
Data Fig. 9), likely due to compensatory reasons. These data suggest that Ins2 KO retinas 
have a defect in visual processing/response to light under starved conditions.
Retinitis pigmentosa is a human retinal disease characterized by initial degeneration of 
rod cells, the photoreceptors responsible for overall light sensing, causing night blindness. 
This is followed by progressive loss of cone cells, which mediate color vision. The 
combined loss of rods and cones leads to progressive blindness. Death of cone cells has 
been attributed to defects in glucose homeostasis4–6. Independently, defects in light-induced Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 7
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptInsR activation31,43, as well as downstream signaling pathways44, have been implicated in 
cone degeneration. As loss of RPE-derived insulin affects glucose homeostasis and insulin 
signaling in the eye, we asked whether loss of Ins2 affects cone viability in the rd1 mouse 
model of retinitis pigmentosa4. For this, we crossed the Ins2 KO mice to rd1 mutant mice 
and asked whether cone loss might be increased in the rd1/ Ins2 KO mice. Compared to rd1 
mice, cone cell numbers in rd1 Ins2 KO mice were substantially reduced by 8 weeks (Fig. 
5d). These data suggest that RPE-derived insulin is important for maintaining cone viability 
in a model of retinal disease.
Discussion
The data presented in this work provide several insights. First, multiple orthogonal pieces 
of evidence reveal RPE cells as a source of local Ins2 in the retina. Second, insulin 
produced in the RPE is modulated by phagocytosis (a key function of the RPE), with 
specific phagocytic receptors linked to RPE phagocytosis influencing Ins2 induction; this 
also suggests that failures in RPE-mediated phagocytosis, besides the defective removal 
of damaged POS, may have broader consequences to metabolic homeostasis of the retina, 
including serine metabolism. As we were revising this work, a new study45 reported that 
the MerTK KO strain used here17,36 (and also used by numerous investigators over many 
years) has reduced expression of another TAM receptor, Tyro3. In this study45, the authors 
further showed that generically ablating Tyro3 together with conditional deletion of MerTK 
can phenocopy the retinal deficits characteristic of the original MerTK KO line. Relevant 
to our current work, although the reduced Tyro3 expression may have contributed to the 
decreased Ins2 expression we see in the MerTK KO mice, it is notable that Tyro3 is 
also a phagocytic receptor. Further, we took two additional orthogonal approaches in our 
work that further support the notion that phagocytosis is linked to insulin production: the 
CD36 null mice, which show a decrease in Ins2 expression and the ‘gain of function’ with 
the MerTK cleavage-resistant mice that shows an increase in insulin production. Third, 
while RPE-derived insulin (similar to pancreatic insulin) is important for promoting glucose 
uptake in the retina, RPE-derived insulin is regulated differently from systemic insulin 
during starvation and starvation also promotes phagocytosis by the RPE. Of note, multiple 
previous studies have noted the retina as insensitive to systemic insulin11,12. Our data 
suggest that insensitivity of the retina to systemic insulin may in part arise from local insulin 
produced by the RPE. Fourth, in mice lacking Ins2 (with normal circulating glucose levels 
via continued expression of Ins1), there is exacerbated cone death in a mouse model of 
retinitis pigmentosa, highlighting the importance of RPE-derived insulin in mitigating retinal 
degeneration. In our studies we found that the human retina also produces insulin; however, 
there are no reports of the RPE being a target of autoimmune destruction in type 1 diabetes. 
As the retina is considered to be immune privileged, one aspect of future research will be 
to address how the local insulin production in the eye may impact autoimmune outcomes in 
type 1 diabetes. Collectively, the data presented in this work advance the concept that the 
RPE provide a local source of insulin in the eye and this has functional relevance to retinal 
physiology, retinal metabolic homeostasis and in limiting retinal disease.Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 8
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptMethods
Reagents
The reagents used for different parts of this work were obtained from the indicated 
suppliers as follows: RNAProtect cell reagent (QIAGEN, 76526), NucleoSpin RNA isolation 
kit (Macherey Nagel, 740955), Quanti-Tect reverse transcription kit (QIAGEN, 205313) 
and Taqman probes (Thermo Fisher): Ins2 (Mm00731595_gH), Mer (Mm00434920_m1), 
rhodopsin  (Mm01184405_m1) and Ins1 (Mm01950294_s1). Antibodies used were anti-
insulin (Agilent, IR002), anti-insulin (Cell Signaling, 3014), anti-C-peptide (Phoenix 
Pharmaceuticals, H-035-03), anti-Cre recombinase (Millipore, MAB3120), anti-rhodopsin 
(Abcam, ab98887), anti-cone arrestin (Millipore, AB15282), anti-phospho insulin receptor- β 
(Tyr1150/1151) (19H7) (Cell Signaling, 3024), anti-insulin receptor- β (Novus Biologicals, 
NBP2 12793), anti-Glut4 (Alomone Labs, AGT 024), anti- β actin HRP (Sigma, A3854) 
and anti-rabbit IgG HRP (GE Healthcare, NA934V). We also used Halt Phosphatase 
inhibitor (Thermo Fisher, 1862495), Halt Protease inhibitor (Thermo Fisher, 1862209), 
ultrasensitive mouse insulin ELISA (Mercodia, 10-1249-01), mouse C-peptide ELISA 
(CrystalChem, 90050), rat/mouse C-peptide 2 ELISA (Millipore, EZRMCP2), glucose 
Glo Assay (Promega, J602), lactate Glo Assay (Promega, J5021) and eBioscience Foxp3 
Transcription Factor Staining Buffer Set (Thermo Fisher, 00-5523-00).
Mice
Mice were housed in a vivarium with a 14-10-h light–dark cycle, with lights on at 6:00 and 
turning off at 20:00. They receive an ad libitum diet (unless otherwise noted for individual 
experiments) of regular chow and are kept at 72 °F and 40% humidity. C57BL/6J, Best1 -Cre 
(strain 017557), YFPflox-stop-flox (strain 006148), rhodopsin -Cre (015850), CD36  KO (strain 
019006) and Rd1 (strain 000656) mice were acquired from Jackson Laboratories and bred 
in our facilities. MerTK KO mouse strain36 was acquired from Jackson Laboratories (strain 
011122) and backcrossed to C57BL/6J for six generations. Controls for MerTK KO and 
CD36  were WT littermates. Ins2f/f mice46 were generated as previously described and were 
crossed to Best1 -Cre or rhodopsin -Cre47 strains. Controls for these mice were Best1 -Cre, 
rhodopsin -Cre and/or Ins2f/f. Ins2 KO mice used in these experiments came from a mix 
of Ins2f/f crossed to E2A-Cre (from Jackson Laboratories) in which progeny were selected 
for global loss of Ins2f/f and were then backcrossed to C57BL/6J to remove E2A-Cre or 
from Nod.Ins2null ( Jackson laboratories) backcrossed to C57BL/6J for four generations 
(diabetes in NOD mice predominantly affects females and autoimmunity is lost with just one 
backcross). Control for these mice were C57BL/6J for Ins2f/f and WT littermate control for 
Ins2null. Mer cleavage-resistant mice have been described previously39. Controls for these 
mice were WT littermates. Rd1 mice were crossed to Ins2null mice and Rd1 littermates 
were used as controls. Rd1 and Rd1 Ins2null were then dissected at 8 weeks of age. Only 
male mice were used in these experiments. All animals were killed between 9–12 weeks; 
two exceptions were MerTK KO mice (and respective controls), which were killed at 4 
weeks of age before onset of any retinal complications, and Ins2 KO (and control) used for 
metabolomics, which were killed at 10–18 weeks. All animal procedures were approved by 
and performed according to guidelines of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee 
at the University of Virginia.Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 9
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptGene expression analysis
RNA isolation for RPE.— Isolation of RPE for gene expression analysis was conducted 
as previously described with a few modifications48. Mice were killed with CO 2 and eyes 
were enucleated. Eyes were then further dissected in ice-cold PBS to carefully remove lens, 
cornea, iris and retina. The eye cup (containing RPE/sclera/choroid) was then moved toa 
microcentrifuge tube containing 100 µl of ice-cold RNAProtect cell reagent and left on ice 
for 20 min. During this time, a tube containing the eye cup was gently tapped at intervals of 
5 min. After, the eye cup was removed and cells were spun at 4 °C for 5 min at 700 g leaving 
an RPE pellet behind. RNAProtect cell reagent was removed and subsequent RNA isolation 
was performed using the NucleoSpin RNA isolation kit (Macherey Nagel).
Nuclear isolation from RPE and RNA extraction.— RPE cells were isolated as 
previously described49. YFP+ RPE cells were sorted with a FACS Aria Fusion cell sorter. 
Cells were then spun down at 1,000 g for 5 min at 4 °C and hydrated in 1 ml cells lysis 
buffer with protease inhibitors (1% Tween40, 2 mM MgCl 2, 10 mM β-glycerophosphate, pH 
7 and 5% glycerol) and incubated for 5 min on ice. Thereafter 1 ml water was added and 
cells were again incubated for 5 min on ice. Cells were then broken up with a glass Dounce 
homogenizer using a tight inserting pestle until nuclei were liberated. Lysates were layered 
on top of a two-step sucrose cushion containing 20 ml lower cushion (500 mM sucrose, 2 
mM MgCl 2, 25 mM KCl, 65 mM β-glycerophosphate, pH 7 and 5% glycerol) and 10 ml 
upper cushion (340 mM sucrose, 2 mM MgCl 2, 25 mM KCl, 65 mM β-glycerophosphate, 
pH 7 and 5% glycerol), spun down at 1,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C and supernatant was 
discarded. Crude nuclei were resuspended in a desired amount of upper cushion solution. 
Subsequent downstream RNA isolation was performed using the NucleoSpin RNA isolation 
kit (Macherey Nagel).
RNA Isolation for other tissue.— All other tissue except retina were dissected and 
homogenized using a PRO200 homogenizer (Proscientific). Retinas were homogenized 
by pipetting up and down with a p200 pipetman. After homogenization, subsequent 
downstream RNA isolation was performed using the NucleoSpin RNA isolation kit 
(Macherey Nagel).
Primary RPE cell culture RNA isolation.— Primary RPE cell culture was performed 
as previously described49. RPE and immortalized mouse embryonic fibroblasts were then 
grown for 2–4 weeks, after which homogenization and RNA isolation was performed using 
the NucleoSpin RNA isolation kit (Macherey Nagel).
RT–PCR.— Complementary DNA synthesis was performed using Quanti-Tect reverse 
transcription kit (QIAGEN). FC and expression-level gene analysis for target and 
housekeeping genes was performed using Taqman probes (Applied Biosystems) run on a 
StepOnePlus Real Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems).
Retinal cryotissue sections for RNAScope and IHC
Mice were killed with CO 2 and eyes were enucleated. Retinal tissue cryosections were 
prepared from enucleated eyes as previously described50. RNAScope was performed Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 10
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptusing the V2 Multiplex-Fluorescent assay (ACDbio) per manufacturer’s instructions. 
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed as previously described50. Representative 
images were taken using a Zeiss LSM 880 confocal microscope.
RPE protein isolation and analysis
Protein isolates from RPE were obtained as previously described51. Insulin ELISA was 
performed per manufacturer’s instructions using Ultrasensitive Mouse Insulin ELISA 
(Mercodia). C-peptide ELISA was performed as per manufacturer’s instructions using the 
Mouse C-peptide (CrytalChem) and Rat/Mouse C-peptide 2 (Millipore) ELISA kits.
KCl induced release of insulin in the eye cup
Eyes were enucleated and retinas were removed from the eye cups in Krebs–Ringer–
bicarbonate–HEPES buffer (KRB). Eye cups were then incubated in fresh KRB at 37 
°C for 5 min, KRB was removed and replaced with fresh KRB at 5 mM or 50 mM 
KCl concentration for 10 min at 37 °C. Supernatant was collected and then probed for 
C-peptide-2 through ELISA.
Human tissue samples
De-identified human surgical enucleation specimens were obtained from the University 
of Virginia Department of Pathology archives via the auspices of the University of 
Virginia Biorepository and Tissue Research Facility. A protocol for utilization of de-
identified archival paraffin-embedded specimens was approved by the University of Virginia 
Institutional Review Board. Informed consent from donors was waived. All staining on 
human tissue samples used formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections.
Inter photoreceptor matrix protein isolation
Mice were killed with CO 2 and eyes were enucleated on a dry dish. Lens and vitreous humor 
were then dissected out and then the retina was delicately separated from the rest of the eye 
cup. Soluble proteins from the retina interphotoreceptor matrix of each retina were washed 
out in 80 µl of HBSS without Ca2+/Mg2+ with protease and phosphatase inhibitors for 20 
min on a shaker (500 r.p.m.) at 4 °C. Isolate was then centrifuge at 14,000 g for 5 min 
at 4 °C. Supernatant was then collected and subsequent C-peptide ELISA (CrystalChem) 
was performed as per manufacturer’s instructions. Results were normalized to the protein 
concentration from each supernatant.
Glucose tolerance test
Dextrose (1.5 g kg−1) was prepared, sterile filtered and injected intraperitoneally. The 
glucose excursion was monitored over a 2-h time course and compared between genotypes. 
Tail vein blood samples were analyzed by glucometer (OneTouch Verio Flex) at 0, 15, 45, 60 
and 120 min following dextrose injection. The cumulative glycemic excursion was evaluated 
as the area under the curve.Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 11
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptImmunoprecipitation
Equal amounts of protein lysate were incubated overnight at 4 °C with anti-insulin receptor-
β antibody (10 g mg−1 lysate, Novus Biologicals, NBP2 12793) and pre-washed SureBeads 
Protein G Magnetic Beads (Bio-Rad). Unbound protein and antibody were removed, and 
protein bead complexes were washed per manufacturer instructions. Bound protein was 
eluted in Laemmli sample buffer containing β-mercaptoethanol and incubated at 70 °C for 
10 min.
Immunoblotting of retina, muscle and fat
Protein lysates were prepared from isolated tissue using RIPA lysis buffer with added Halt 
Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Scientific). Equal amounts of protein 
lysate were loaded in TGX Precast gels (Bio-Rad) or in-house-made 7% polyacrylamide 
gels, then subjected to SDS–PAGE. Protein was transferred onto PVDF membranes using 
the Trans Blot Turbo transfer system (Bio-Rad). After transfer, blots were blocked for 
1–3 h in 5% dry milk in TBST at room temperature, then probed using anti-phospho 
insulin receptor β (Tyr1150/1151) (19H7) (1:1,000 dilution, Cell Signaling, 3024), anti-
insulin receptor β (1:5,000 dilution, Novus Biologicals, NBP2 12793), anti-Glut4 (1:1,000 
dilution, Alomone Labs AGT, 024), anti- β actin HRP (1:15,000 dilution, Sigma, A3854) and 
Amersham ECL anti-rabbit IgG HRP (1:5,000 dilution, GE Healthcare, NA934V). In some 
experiments, primary and secondary antibodies were diluted in SignalBoost Immunoreaction 
Enhancer kit solutions (Millipore Sigma). Blots were exposed using Western Lightning Plus 
ECL kit (PerkinElmer) or SuperSignal West Femto ECL kit (Thermo Scientific). Images 
were collected on the ChemiDoc Touch imagining system and analyzed using ImageLab 
software (Bio-Rad).
Streptozotocin treatment
Diabetes was induced by intraperitoneal injections of a freshly prepared solution of STZ in 
0.1 M citrate buffer (pH 4.4) at 60 mg kg−1 body weight once a day for 5 d in male mice at 
4–6 weeks of age. Control mice were injected with only citrate buffer. Diabetic mice were 
then maintained for 4 weeks after the last injection of STZ before retinas were dissected 
and processed for immunoprecipitation. All diabetic mice processed for this experiment had 
non-fasting glucose levels >600 mg dl−1.
RPE dissociation and phagocytosis assay with flow cytometry
Mice were killed with CO 2 and eyes were enucleated. Eyes were then further dissected 
in ice-cold PBS to carefully remove lens, cornea, iris and retina. The eye cup (containing 
RPE/sclera/choroid) was then moved to a microcentrifuge tube containing 100 µl of 200 
U ml−1 of pre warmed Collagenase IV . The microcentrifuge containing the eye cup was 
then submerged in 37 °C water bath for 12 min and the tube was gently tapped every 
2 min. After, the reaction was quenched in flow cytometry sample buffer and the eye 
cup was removed. Microcentrifuge tube containing dissociated RPEs was then spun at 
400g at 4 °C for 5 min. Supernatant was removed and cells were treated with fixation 
solution (100 µl) from Foxp3 eBio kit (1:4 fixative:diluent) for 30 min room temperature. 
Cells were subsequently washed with permeabilization buffer (Foxp3 eBio kit) 1:10 in Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 12
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptdH20, resuspended in permeabilization buffer for 15 min and then incubated with anti-
rhodopsin antibody at 4 °C for 1 h. Cells were then spun at 400 g for 5 min, washed 1× in 
permeabilization buffer and then incubated with secondary antibody for 30 min. Cells were 
then washed 1× with permeabilization buffer, 1× with flow cytometry sample buffer and 
finally resuspended in flow cytometry sample buffer. Cells were then run on a AttuneNxT 
Flow Cytometer. The gating strategy used is shown in Supplementary Fig. 1.
RPE phagocytosis analysis using IHC
Retinas from starved and fed mice dissected 2 h after light onset were stained with anti-
rhodopsin (Abcam). Imaging was conducted with a Zeiss Axio Observer and quantification 
was performed using ImageJ. Quantification of phagocytosis was measured by the amount 
of rhodopsin immunoreactivity in the RPE divided by pixels (middle panel) and presented as 
phagosomes per area on the y axis. Quantification of the number of phagosomes in RPE was 
done by counting rhodopsin puncta in the RPE (right). A representative image was taken 
using a Zeiss LSM 880 confocal microscope.
PET imaging
All mice were fasted overnight the day before PET/CT scan. The mice were anesthetized 
using isoflurane and oxygen mixture (inhalation anesthesia, 5% ratio during induction, later 
reduced to 2%). The animals were given [18F]FDG (4.0 ± 2.8 MBq) via intraperitoneal 
injection. After a 45-min injection, static PET/CT imaging was performed for 15–20 min 
followed by a 10-min CT scan using the Albira Si small animal tri-modal PET/CT/SPECT 
scanner (Bruker). PET images were reconstructed as previously described52. Image co-
registration and analysis was performed using PMOD 4.1 (PMOD Technologies). Averaged 
standard uptake values (SUVs) were derived for each volume of interest (VOI) and data 
are reported as percent injected dose per ml (%ID ml−1). Datasets were fully corrected for 
random coincidences, scatter and attenuation. Images were smoothed with a Gaussian filter 
(1.35 mm in both directions).
PET image data analysis
The images were normalized as SUVs using the formula SUV = decay of the corrected mean 
tissue activity concentration (Bq ml−1) / (injected dose (Bq) × body weight (g)). A VOI 
was manually drawn around left and right retina using PMOD 4.1, Pview. The maximal 
SUV was calculated for the corresponding VOIs. To control for potential effects of insulin 
ablation on total glucose levels, values were similarly obtained for the liver and retina and 
the values were then normalized to those of the liver. The normalized values are those 
presented in Fig. 4 as a percent uptake relative to WT.
Dynamic PET imaging
Mice were imaged using Albira Si Tri-modal PET/SPECT/CT scanner. The Albira PET 
imager is a three-ring scanner with an axial field of view (FOV) of 150 mm and transaxial 
FOV of 80 mm. The volumetric spatial resolution of the PET system ranges from 0.41–
0.87 mm3 at the axial center with a sensitivity of 11% at the center of the FOV . The 
noise equivalent count rate for the mouse phantom was measured to be 486 kcps at 23 Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 13
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptMBq. Dynamic FDG PET imaging of the mice were performed using a similar protocol 
as described earlier53. Rate of FDG uptake, Ki (and kinetic rate constants) and total blood 
volume were computed in MatLab (MathWorks) as described previously54.
Retina whole glucose and lactate luciferase assay
Mice were killed with CO 2 and eyes were enucleated. Lens and vitreous humor were then 
dissected out and then the retina was delicately separated from the rest of the eye cup. 
Retinas were then processed and analyzed with Promega Glucose or Lactate Glo luciferase 
kit per manufacturer’s instructions. A lactate value in the Best1 -Cre Ins2f/f dataset was 
thrown out due to extreme variability.
Metabolite extraction
Mice were fasted overnight and killed with avertin after light onset. Five replicates each of 
both retinal and RPE tissues (from WT and KO mice) were collected and dissected, flash 
frozen and stored at −80 °C until extraction. Tissues were thawed on ice. Approximately 400 
µl of cold methanol was added to along with four steel balls (Fischer Brand; diameter 2.4 
mm) and shaken vigorously in Fischer Brand Bead Mill 24 at speed of 5 Hz, three cycles of 
20 s each with 10 s rest. Tubes were further vortexed and shaken at 900 r.p.m. for 30 min at 
4 °C in temperature controlled thermal shaker. After adding 200 µl of chloroform and 400 µl 
of water, the top aqueous phase was recovered as metabolite mixture. Metabolite extract was 
dried overnight in speedVac and reconstituted in 100 µl of 0.1% FA. A total of 10 µl from 
each tube was removed to create a pooled quality control (QC) sample that was injected at 
the beginning and end of the mass spectrometry (MS) sequence and additional QC samples 
were injected after every five sample injections.
Untargeted metabolite analysis
Untargeted metabolite analysis was performed on a Thermo Orbitrap IDX Tribrid MS 
at Biomolecular Analysis Facility, University of Virginia, School of Medicine. Samples 
were transported to the MS via a Thermo Vanquish UHPLC and separation of the polar 
metabolites was achieved using Waters BEH C18 column (Waters Corp; 2.1 × 150 mm; 1.7 
µm) maintained at 30 °C. A conventional data-dependent acquisition mode was used for 
data acquisition and samples were randomized during extraction and analysis on the mass 
spectrometer. The injection volume was 5 µl. For the 15-min gradient, the standard mobile 
phase for RPLC was Buffer A = 0.1% formic acid in water and Buffer B = 0.1% formic acid 
in methanol in electrospray ionization (ESI) positive and negative mode. The linear gradient 
elution was as follows: 0–8 min 50% B, 8–13 min held at 98% B, and 13.1–15.0 min revert 
to 0% B to re-equilibrate for the next injection. ESI source conditions were set as follows: 
ion source type was H-ESI; positive ion voltage was set at 3,500 and negative was set at 
2,500. Sheath gas was set at 35 and auxiliary gas was set at 7. Ion transfer tube temperature 
was set at 275 °C and vaporizer temperature was set at 320 °C.
Data were acquired in full MS mode (1 µscan) at a resolution of 120,000 with a scan range 
of 67–1,000 m/z at a normalized AGC target of 25% and 50 ms of maximum injection 
time was allowed. RF lens amplitude was set at 35%. Tandem MS/MS performed by 
applying quadrupole isolation with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z. Activation type was Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 14
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptset at HCD and masses were fragmented with HCD Assisted Collision Energy (%) of 
15,35,50. Fragment masses were detected by Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000. A total of 
20 × 2 sample runs (negative and positive mode), ten QC runs (5 × 2 negative and positive 
mode) and 4 × 2 blanks (negative and positive) tandem MS/MS runs were acquired. Thermo 
*.RAW files were converted to an Open Source *.mzML format using msConvert software 
(http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/download.html ) and brought into MS-DIAL software 
for analysis ( http://prime.psc.riken.jp/compms/msdial/main.html )55,56.
MS-DIAL analysis parameters were as follows: MS1 tolerance was set at 0.01 Da and 
Ms2 tolerance at 0.025 Da. Data were collected from 0–15 min at a mass range from 
50–1,000 Da. Peak detection was performed with a minimum peak height of 1 × 105 and 
mass slice width of 0.1 Da. Metabolites were identified by searching the MS2 spectra in 
the MS-DIAL public database (290,915 records for positive and 36,848 entries for negative 
mode; v.14) using a mass tolerance of 0.01 Da for MS1 and 0.05 Da for MS/MS with 
identification score cutoff of 60%. Additionally, peaks were also searched against a library 
from IROA Technologies (in both positive and negative mode) with a mass tolerance of 
0.01, identification cutoff of 90% and RT tolerance of 0.5 min (MS Metabolite Library of 
Standards; http://iroatech.com/ ). For peak alignment maximum retention tolerance was set 
at 0.2 min. Alignment data for all the samples with annotated and unknown identification 
was exported to MS-CleanR R package (refs. 54,55). Using MS-CleanR blank injection 
signal subtraction, background ion drift removal and unusual mass defect filtering, peaks 
with relative s.d. threshold >30% based on QC were removed. Further data were manually 
examined and curated to remove duplicates and identification was confirmed based on 
MS-Finder (using a formula and structure search). Further data processing for statistical 
analysis, univariate and multivariate analysis was performed in R.
Electroretinography
ERG was performed as previously described57. Briefly, scotopic ERG was performed 
on 13-24-week-old mice. Mice were dark-adapted overnight before the experiments and 
anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of 100 mg kg−1 ketamine hydrochloride. The pupils 
were dilated with tropicamide (1%) and phenylephrine (2.5%) eye drops. ERG was recorded 
using a Ganzfeld ERG (Phoenix laboratories). Scotopic combined responses were obtained 
using the LabScribe software (Phoenix Laboratories) under dark-adapted conditions (no 
background illumination, 0 cd m−2) in response to white-flash stimuli ranging from −1.7 
to 1.0 log cd s m−2 with 20 responses averaged for each stimulus. The amplitude of 
b-wave  was measured as the difference between the a-wave  min and the b-wave  max.
Retina whole mounts for Rd1 and Rd1 Ins2 KO mice
Mice were killed with CO 2 and eyes were enucleated. Retinal tissue cryosections were 
prepared from enucleated eyes as previously described50. IHC using cone arrestin antibodies 
was performed as previously described50. Imaging was conducted with a Leica DMi 8 
Thunder/TIRF microscope and quantification of the number of cones in the center retina was 
performed using ImageJ. The center retina was defined as a 1-mm diameter circle with the 
optic nerve in the center.Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 15
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptStatistical analysis
All box and whiskers plots show minimum to maximum with all independent replicates 
included, the horizontal line within the box depicting the median and the box extending from 
the 25th to 75th percentiles. Statistical tests were performed using GraphPad Prism v.8 as 
indicated in figure legends. Outlier data points were identified using the ROUT method with 
Q = 1%, with the exception of Extended Data Fig. 4b, where Grubbs with an α of 0.2 was 
used. No statistical tests were used to determine sample size.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting 
Summary linked to this article.
Extended Data
Extended Data Fig. 1 |. Expression of Ins2 mRNA and Protein Within the RPE Cells of the Eye.
a. RT–PCR of Ins2 from mRNA isolated from different mouse tissues. n = 3 mice used for 
each tissue. **p < .01, one-way ANOV A on ranks. b. Flow cytometry panels showing YFP+ 
gating strategy for isolated RPE from Best1 -Cre/YFPflox-STOP-flox mice. c. Representative 
image of two independent experiments showing immunofluorescence analysis at 40x 
magnification on mouse retina from Rhodopsin -Cre Ins2f/f mice using antibodies against Cre 
(green) (left). RT–PCR of Ins2 mRNA in RPE of Rhodopsin -Cre Ins2f/f shows no change in 
the expression of the Ins2 transcript compared to control (right). n = 2 mice used for each 
genotype. d. Representative image of immunofluorescence analysis at 60x magnification 
on human retina using antibodies against C-peptide (magenta) with brightfield microscopy. 
Merge shows that C-peptide, a byproduct of insulin secretion and a metric of insulin release, 
is present and located in the retina. Plots are presented as in Fig. 1.Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 16
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptExtended Data Fig. 2 |. Data Mining / Reanalysis of scRNAseq Data from Macaque Retinas 
Reveals Ins2 mRNA Expression in RPE and RPE-like Cells.
a. UMAP plot showing different cell types with the RPE-like cell clusters labeled. b. 
Violin plot showing normalized expression levels of TPM2, a RPE cell gene marker, for 
all samples. The clusters with the highest TPM2 expression overlay with the clusters we 
defined as containing RPE-like cells. c. Violin plot showing normalized expression levels of 
INS in one young male monkey sample (YM2). The detectable expression of INS in YM2 
was restricted to RPE-like cells.
Extended Data Fig. 3 |. Ins1 mRNA and Insulin Receptor Phosphorylation in Ins2 KO mice.
a. RT–PCR of Ins1 fold change in mRNA of isolated RPE from control and Ins2 KO mice. 
n = 8 mice used for each genotype. b. Insulin receptor was immunoprecipitated from various 
tissue lysates of control and Ins2 KO mice that were starved overnight. Phosphorylation 
status of the InsR was probed using phospho-specific InsR antibodies via immunoblotting 
and quantified as the ratio of p-InsR to total InsR. n = 2 mice for control vs Ins2 KO. Plots 
are presented as in Fig. 1.
Extended Data Fig. 4 |. InsR Phosphorylation Decreases in the Retina of Ins2 KO, but not 
Control, Streptozotocin (STZ) Treated Mice.Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 17
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscripta. Schematic of streptozotocin (STZ) treatment. b. ELISA measuring C-peptide levels in 
blood of control, control STZ-treated, and Ins2 KO STZ-treated mice starved mice. N = 6 
mice for control and N = 4 mice for STZ-treated Control and STZ-treated Ins2 KO. *p < .05, 
one-way ANOV A with Dunnet’s multiple comparisons test. c. Insulin receptor (InsR) was 
immunoprecipitated from retina tissue lysates of control, control STZ-treated, and Ins2KO 
STZ-treated mice, starved overnight (left) or control and control STZ-treated mice fed 
ad libitum (right). Phosphorylation status of the InsR was probed using phospho-specific 
antibodies (Tyr1150/1151) via immunoblotting and quantified as the ratio of p-InsR to total 
InsR, normalized to untreated WT mice. N = 3 mice for all conditions. *p < 05, one-way 
ANOV A with Tukey’s multiple comparison’s test. Plots are presented as in Fig. 1.
Extended Data Fig. 5 |. RPE Phagocytosis Increases in Starved Mice vs Fed and is not Changed 
in Ins2 KO Mice.
a. Quantification of OS phagocytosis by the RPE 2 hours after light onset using 
immunohistochemistry. Quantification of phagocytosis was measured by the amount of 
Rhodopsin immunoreactivity in the RPE divided by pixels and presented as phagosomes 
per area on the y-axis (left). Quantification of the number of phagosomes in RPE was done 
by counting Rhodopsin puncta in the RPE (right). n = 3 mice used for each condition. *p 
≤ .05 paired two-tailed t-test. b. Western blot against Rhodopsin on isolated RPE protein 
lysates from fed and starved mice at 8 am and 10 am (left). Right panel is quantification 
of the blot to evaluate POS degradation showing 10 am band intensity as a percent of 8 am 
(peak phagocytosis) band intensity (right). n = 2 mice used for each time point. c. Insulin 
receptor was immunoprecipitated from lysates of retina from control and MerTK KO mice 
that were starved overnight. The lysates were probed for InsR phosphorylation or GLUT4 
levels by immunoblotting. C-peptide 2 levels were determined by ELISA. N = 6 mice for 
each condition. *p < .05 paired two-tailed t-test. d. Schematic of WT and cleavage-resistant 
‘gain of function’ MerTKCR mice with altered cleavage sites indicated (left). e. Phagocytosis 
quantification of ingested photoreceptor outer segments using flow cytometry on isolated 
RPE stained with antibody against rhodopsin from Control and Ins2 KO mice two hours 
after light onset. n = 7 mice used for each genotype. Plots are presented as in Fig. 1.Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 18
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptExtended Data Fig. 6 |. Loss of Ins2 leads to decreased eye glucose uptake as measured by 
Dynamic in vivo PET.
a. Quantification of Dynamic in vivo  PET imaging for 18[F]FDG glucose uptake in the eyes 
of control and Ins2 KO mice after 18[F]FDG injection.
Extended Data Fig. 7 |. Untargeted Metabolomics Reveals Changes in Global Metabolism of 
Retinas from WT vs Ins2 Knockout Mice.
a. Enrichment analysis of metabolites from untargeted metabolomics for control over Ins2 
KO retinas (using KEGG database). Data are representative of four biological replicates. 
b. Impact analysis of specific metabolic pathways down (left) and up (right) in control vs 
Ins2 KO retinas using KEGG database. Pathway significance was determined using Fisher’s 
Exact Tests.Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 19
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptExtended Data Fig. 8 |. Untargeted Metabolomics of RPE from WT and Ins2 Knockout Mice 
reveals Minimal Changes in Global metabolism.
a. V olcano plot from untargeted metabolomics of RPE representing statistically enriched or 
reduced metabolites in the RPE of control mice relative to those of Ins2 KO using Fisher’s 
exact test. False Discovery rate (FDR, p < 0.1) is shown in red, absolute value of the Lo g2 
fold change of 0.3 (1.2 fold change) in orange, and those in blue meet both criteria. Data are 
representative of 4 biological replicates. b. Enrichment analysis of metabolites using KEGG 
database from untargeted metabolomics for control over Ins2 knockout RPE cells. c. Impact 
analysis of specific metabolic pathways in control vs Ins2 KO RPE using KEGG database. 
Pathway significance was determined using Fisher’s Exact Tests.Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 20
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptExtended Data Fig. 9 |. a-wave Amplitude in the Retina of Fed. or Starved Control and Ins2 KO 
Mice.
a. Schematic of scotopic electroretinogram (ERG) on mouse retina to detect visual 
processing in response to light (top). Quantification of a-wave amplitude in ERG of WT 
and Ins2 KO mice under fed and starved condition (bottom). n = 8 mice for WT, n = 4 mice 
for Ins2 KO mice.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
We thank members of the Ravichandran laboratory as well as B. Gelfand and R. Lindsay for input and critical 
reading of the manuscript. We thank E. Thorpe and I. Tabas for the MerTKCR mice, J. Mandell for human Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 21
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptretinal samples and E. Nandrot and R. Rajala for advice on specific protocols. Figure schematics were created 
using BioRender images as templates. This work was supported by grants to K.S.R. from the National Institute of 
General Medical Sciences (R35GM122542), National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (R01AI159551), 
the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (P01HL120840), the Center for Cell Clearance/University of Virginia 
and Bone and Joint Canada Investigator funds from the Washington University School of Medicine to J.I.E. via NEI 
F32 (EY031211) and T32AI7496-23. J.A. is a cofounder of DiceRx, iVeena Holdings, iVeena Delivery Systems, 
and Inflammasome Therapeutics; has been a consultant for Abbvie, Boehringer-Ingelheim, Olix Pharmaceuticals, 
Retinal Solutions, and Saksin LifeSciences; and is named as an inventors on patent applications filed by his 
university, all unrelated to this work. J.A. has received support from the UV A Strategic Investment Fund, National 
Institutes of Health (NIH) grants (R01EY028027, R01EY029799, R01EY031039, R01AG082108), DuPont Guerry, 
III, Professorship, and a gift from Mr. and Mrs. Eli W. Tullis.
Data availability
Untargeted metabolomics data can be found at www.metabolomic-sworkbench.org , 
with project ID PR001193 or visit at https://doi.org/10.21228/M8H419 . Untargeted 
metabolomics data were analyzed using the MetabolAnalyst v.5.0 platform ( https://
www.metaboanalyst.ca/ ). Source data are provided with this paper.
References
1. Swarup A et al. Modulating GLUT1 expression in retinal pigment epithelium decreases glucose 
levels in the retina: impact on photoreceptors and Müller glial cells. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol 
316, C121–C133 (2019). [PubMed: 30462537] 
2. Kanow MA et al. Biochemical adaptations of the retina and retinal pigment epithelium support a 
metabolic ecosystem in the vertebrate eye. eLife 6, e28899 (2017). [PubMed: 28901286] 
3. Winkler BS Glycolytic and oxidative metabolism in relation to retinal function. J. Gen. Physiol 77, 
667–692 (1981). [PubMed: 6267165] 
4. Punzo C, Kornacker K & Cepko CL Stimulation of the insulin/mTOR pathway delays cone death in 
a mouse model of retinitis pigmentosa. Nat. Neurosci 12, 44–52 (2009). [PubMed: 19060896] 
5. Aït-Ali N et al. Rod-derived cone viability factor promotes cone survival by stimulating aerobic 
glycolysis. Cell 161, 817–832 (2015). [PubMed: 25957687] 
6. Wang W et al. Two-step reactivation of dormant cones in retinitis pigmentosa. Cell Rep 15, 372–385 
(2016). [PubMed: 27050517] 
7. Young RW & Bok D Participation of the retinal pigment epithelium in the rod outer segment 
renewal process. J. Cell Biol 42, 392–403 (1969). [PubMed: 5792328] 
8. Adijanto J et al. The retinal pigment epithelium utilizes fatty acids for ketogenesis: implications 
for metabolic coupling with the outer retina. J. Biol. Chem 289, 20570–20582 (2014). [PubMed: 
24898254] 
9. Wang W et al. Metabolic deregulation of the blood-outer retinal barrier in retinitis pigmentosa. Cell 
Rep 28, 1323–1334 (2019). [PubMed: 31365873] 
10. Lynch SK & Abràmoff MD Diabetic retinopathy is a neurodegenerative disorder. Vis. Res 139, 
101–107 (2017). [PubMed: 28408138] 
11. Reiter CEN et al. Characterization of insulin signaling in rat retina in vivo and ex vivo. Am. J. 
Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab 285, E763–E774 (2003). [PubMed: 12799319] 
12. James CR & Cotlier E Fate of insulin in the retina: an autoradiographic study. Br. J. Ophthalmol 
67, 80–88 (1983). [PubMed: 6336953] 
13. Zolov SN et al. Insulin-like growth factor-2 regulates basal retinal insulin receptor activity. J. Biol. 
Chem 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100712 (2021).
14. Tarchick MJ et al. Endogenous insulin signaling in the RPE contributes to the maintenance of rod 
photoreceptor function in diabetes. Exp. Eye Res 180, 63–74 (2019). [PubMed: 30543793] 
15. Rajala A, Tanito M, Le YZ, Kahn CR & Rajala RVS Loss of neuroprotective survival signal in 
mice lacking insulin receptor gene in rod photoreceptor cells. J. Biol. Chem 283, 19781–19792 
(2008). [PubMed: 18480052] Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 22
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript16. Edwards RB & Szamier RB Defective phagocytosis of isolated rod outer segments by RCS rat 
retinal pigment epithelium in culture. Science 197, 1001–1003 (1977). [PubMed: 560718] 
17. Burstyn-Cohen T et al. Genetic dissection of TAM receptor-ligand interaction in retinal pigment 
epithelial cell phagocytosis. Neuron 76, 1123–1132 (2012). [PubMed: 23259948] 
18. Penberthy KK et al. Context-dependent compensation among phosphatidylserine-recognition 
receptors. Sci. Rep 7, 14623 (2017). [PubMed: 29116131] 
19. Soares MB et al. RNA-mediated gene duplication: the rat preproinsulin I gene is a functional 
retroposon. Mol. Cell. Biol 5, 2090–2103 (1985). [PubMed: 2427930] 
20. Anderson MS et al. Projection of an immunological self shadow within the thymus by the aire 
protein. Science 298, 1395–1401 (2002). [PubMed: 12376594] 
21. Iacovelli J et al. Generation of Cre transgenic mice with postnatal RPE-specific ocular expression. 
Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci 52, 1378–1383 (2011). [PubMed: 21212186] 
22. Van Cauter E, Mestrez F, Sturis J & Polonsky KS Estimation of insulin secretion rates from C-
peptide levels. Comparison of individual and standard kinetic parameters for C-peptide clearance. 
Diabetes 41, 368–377 (1992). [PubMed: 1551497] 
23. Wang S et al. Deciphering primate retinal aging at single-cell resolution. Protein Cell 10.1007/
s13238-020-00791-x (2020).
24. Giddings SJ, Chirgwin J & Permutt MA The effects of fasting and feeding on preproinsulin 
messenger RNA in rats. J. Clin. Invest 67, 952–960 (1981). [PubMed: 6162861] 
25. Boland BB et al. β-cell control of insulin production during starvation-refeeding in male rats. 
Endocrinology 159, 895–906 (2018). [PubMed: 29244064] 
26. Unger RH, Eisentraut AM & Madison LL The effects of total starvation upon the levels 
of circulating glucagon and insulin in man. J. Clin. Invest 42, 1031–1039 (1963). [PubMed: 
13995385] 
27. Giddings SJ & Carnaghi LR The two nonallelic rat insulin mRNAs and pre-mRNAs are regulated 
coordinately in vivo. J. Biol. Chem 263, 3845–3849 (1988). [PubMed: 2831207] 
28. Duvillié B et al. Phenotypic alterations in insulin-deficient mutant mice. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
94, 5137–5140 (1997). [PubMed: 9144203] 
29. Leroux L et al. Compensatory responses in mice carrying a null mutation for Ins1 or Ins2. Diabetes 
50, S150 (2001). [PubMed: 11272179] 
30. Law A-L et al. Cleavage of Mer tyrosine kinase (MerTK) from the cell surface contributes to the 
regulation of retinal phagocytosis. J. Biol. Chem 290, 4941–4952 (2015). [PubMed: 25538233] 
31. Rajala RVS & Anderson RE Light regulation of the insulin receptor in the retina. Mol. Neurobiol 
28, 123–138 (2003). [PubMed: 14576451] 
32. Sachdeva MM Retinal neurodegeneration in diabetes: an emerging concept in diabetic retinopathy. 
Curr. Diab. Rep 21, 65 (2021). [PubMed: 34902066] 
33. Bok D & Hall MO The role of the pigment epithelium in the etiology of inherited retinal dystrophy 
in the rat. J. Cell Biol 49, 664–682 (1971). [PubMed: 5092207] 
34. LaVail MM Rod outer segment disk shedding in rat retina: relationship to cyclic lighting. Science 
194, 1071–1074 (1976). [PubMed: 982063] 
35. Nandrot EF et al. Loss of synchronized retinal phagocytosis and age-related blindness in mice 
lacking αvβ5 integrin. J. Exp. Med 200, 1539–1545 (2004). [PubMed: 15596525] 
36. Lu Q et al. Tyro-3 family receptors are essential regulators of mammalian spermatogenesis. Nature 
398, 723–728 (1999). [PubMed: 10227296] 
37. D’Cruz PM et al. Mutation of the receptor tyrosine kinase gene MerTK in the retinal dystrophic 
RCS rat. Hum. Mol. Genet 9, 645–651 (2000). [PubMed: 10699188] 
38. Ryeom SW, Sparrow JR & Silverstein RL CD36 participates in the phagocytosis of rod outer 
segments by retinal pigment epithelium. J. Cell Sci 109, 387–395 (1996). [PubMed: 8838662] 
39. Cai B et al. MerTK cleavage limits proresolving mediator biosynthesis and exacerbates tissue 
inflammation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, 6526–6531 (2016). [PubMed: 27199481] 
40. Villa E et al. mTORC1 stimulates cell growth through SAM synthesis and m6A mRNA-dependent 
control of protein synthesis. Mol. Cell 10.1016/j.molcel.2021.03.009 (2021).Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 23
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript41. Sinha T, Ikelle L, Naash MI & Al-Ubaidi MR The intersection of serine metabolism and cellular 
dysfunction in retinal degeneration. Cells 10.3390/cells9030674 (2020).
42. Ducker GS & Rabinowitz JD One-carbon metabolism in health and disease. Cell Metab 25, 27–42 
(2017). [PubMed: 27641100] 
43. Rajala A, Wang Y & Rajala RVS Activation of oncogenic tyrosine kinase signaling promotes 
insulin receptor-mediated cone photoreceptor survival. Oncotarget 7, 46924–46942 (2016). 
[PubMed: 27391439] 
44. Venkatesh A et al. Activated mTORC1 promotes long-term cone survival in retinitis pigmentosa 
mice. J. Clin. Invest 125, 1446–1458 (2015). [PubMed: 25798619] 
45. Akalu YT et al. Tissue-specific modifier alleles determine MerTK loss-of-function traits. eLife 11, 
e80530 (2022). [PubMed: 35969037] 
46. Fan Y et al. Thymus-specific deletion of insulin induces autoimmune diabetes. EMBO J 28, 2812–
2824 (2009). [PubMed: 19680229] 
47. Li S et al. Rhodopsin-iCre transgenic mouse line for Cre-mediated rod-specific gene targeting. 
Genesis 41, 73–80 (2005). [PubMed: 15682388] 
48. Xin-Zhao Wang C, Zhang K, Aredo B, Lu H & Ufret-Vincenty RL Novel method for the rapid 
isolation of RPE cells specifically for RNA extraction and analysis. Exp. Eye Res 102, 1–9 (2012). 
[PubMed: 22721721] 
49. Fernandez-Godino R, Garland DL & Pierce EA Isolation, culture and characterization of primary 
mouse RPE cells. Nat. Protoc 11, 1206–1218 (2016). [PubMed: 27281648] 
50. Venkatesh A, Ma S, Langellotto F, Gao G & Punzo C Retinal gene delivery by rAA V and DNA 
electroporation. Curr. Protoc. Microbiol 10.1002/9780471729259.mc14d04s28 (2013).
51. Wei H, Xun Z, Granado H, Wu A & Handa JT An easy, rapid method to isolate RPE cell protein 
from the mouse eye. Exp. Eye Res 145, 450–455 (2016). [PubMed: 26424220] 
52. Sheybani ND et al. ImmunoPET-informed sequence for focused ultrasound-targeted mCD47 
blockade controls glioma. J. Control. Release 331, 19–29 (2021). [PubMed: 33476735] 
53. Zhong M & Kundu BK Optimization of a model corrected blood input function from dynamic 
FDG-PET images of small animal heart in vivo. IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci 60, 3417–3422 (2013). 
[PubMed: 24741130] 
54. Huang Q, Massey JC, Mińczuk K, Li J & Kundu BK Non-invasive determination of blood input 
function to compute rate of myocardial glucose uptake from dynamic FDG PET images of rat 
heart in vivo: comparative study between the inferior vena cava and the left ventricular blood pool 
with spill over and partial volume corrections. Phys. Med. Biol 64, 165010 (2019). [PubMed: 
31307015] 
55. Tsugawa H et al. MS-DIAL: data-independent MS/MS deconvolution for comprehensive 
metabolome analysis. Nat. Methods 12, 523–526 (2015). [PubMed: 25938372] 
56. Tsugawa H et al. A cheminformatics approach to characterize metabolomes in stable-isotope-
labeled organisms. Nat. Methods 16, 295–298 (2019). [PubMed: 30923379] 
57. Narendran S et al. Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors and Kamuvudines inhibit myloid- β 
induced retinal pigmented epithelium degeneration. Signal Transduct. Target Ther 6, 1–9 (2021). 
[PubMed: 33384407] Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 24
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFig. 1 |. Expression of Ins2 mRNA and protein within the RPE.
a, Ins2 detection in RNA-seq of RPE from WT and MerTK  KO mice. While Ins2 was 
lower in MerTK  KO mice, other growth factors were unaltered (false discovery rate (FDR) 
≤ 0.5). Scale corresponds to z score. n = 4 mice per genotype. b, Ins2 expression in different 
tissues by RT–PCR. n = 3 mice per tissue. HPRT, hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl 
transferase. c, RT–PCR comparing Ins2 expression in retina versus RPE (middle) and Ins1 
versus Ins2 in RPE (right). n = 4 mice. d, Ins2 mRNA in primary cultured RPE cells 
(n = 6 mice) and control mouse embryonic fibroblasts ( n = 3). e, Schematic of RPE and 
photoreceptors (left). Representative image of three independent experiments showing Ins2 
transcript (magenta) within RPE of mouse retina via confocal microscopy using RNAScope 
Multiplex-Fluorescent assay at ×60 magnification (right). A scrambled ‘nonsense’ negative 
probe was used as control. f, Isolated nuclei of RPE contain Ins2 mRNA. Schematic of 
RPE purification and nuclei isolation from Best1 -Cre/YFPflox-STOP-flox mice (left). Analysis 
of indicated genes by RT–PCR (right). n = 4 mice used for rhodopsin  and Ins2, n = 2 
mice for MerTK . g, Ins2 expression in RPE from Best1 -Cre Ins2f/f mice. n = 6 mice 
control, n = 7 Best1 -Cre Ins2f/f. h, ELISA of insulin in protein lysates of RPE. n = 4 mice 
(left). Representative image of three independent experiments showing immunofluorescence 
on mouse retina using anti-insulin or isotype-control antibody (red) and DAPI for cell 
nuclei (right). RPE is outlined in white. i, Isolated eye cups (RPE/choroid/sclera) of WT 
mice were treated with KCl and supernatants were analyzed for C-peptide-2 by ELISA. 
j, Representative immunofluorescence image of human retina stained with anti-insulin 
(magenta) with brightfield microscopy showing RPE (appearing black due to pigment 
granules). Isotype antibody was used as control. Bar graphs are mean ± s.e.m. Box and 
whiskers show minimum to maximum values, center denotes median and the bounds denote 
the 25th to 75th percentiles. * P ≤ 0.05,** P ≤ 0.01,*** P ≤ 0.001, one-way analysis of Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 25
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptvariance (ANOV A) with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test ( b), unpaired two-tailed t-test 
(c,g–i) and nonparametric Mann–Whitney U-test (d,f).Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 26
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFig. 2 |. Ins2 expression in the RPE is regulated differently from systemic insulin.
a, Schematic for measuring C-peptide and Ins2 mRNA in fed and starved (10–14 h) 
conditions (left) and C-peptide cleavage during insulin synthesis (right). b, ELISA for 
C-peptide in blood and protein lysates from retina of fed (ad libitum) and starved mice. Y 
axis shows percentage of C-peptide found in fed mice. n = 5 mice for fed condition, n = 
4 mice for starved. RT–PCR comparing Ins2 expression in RPE from fed or starved mice 
(right). n = 8 mice per condition. c, RT–PCR measuring Ins2 in RPE from control and Ins2 
KO mice. n = 6 mice per genotype. d, Glucose tolerance assay (readout of insulin function) 
measuring circulating glucose levels over time in WT and Ins2 KO mice starved and then 
given glucose intraperitoneally (top). n = 4 mice per genotype. ELISA for C-peptide in 
blood of control and Ins2 KO mice shows no difference between genotypes (bottom). n = 4 
mice per genotype. e, Schematic of the IPM (left). IPM was isolated from WT and Ins2 KO 
mice and the secreted C-peptide in IPM was measured by ELISA (middle). n = 4 mice per 
genotype. ELISA of C-peptide in lysates of RPE from WT and Ins2 KO mice (right). n = 4 
mice WT, n = 3 Ins2 KO. f, Insulin receptor was immunoprecipitated from retina lysates of 
control and Ins2 KO mice, either fed or starved. InsR tyrosine phosphorylation was assessed 
using phospho-specific InsR antibodies via immunoblotting and quantified as the ratio of 
p-InsR to total InsR. Retina lysates were also probed for GLUT4 and quantified as the ratio 
of GLUT4 to actin (normalized to control). n = 4 mice for fed, n = 6 starved conditions. 
Plots are presented as in Fig. 1. * P ≤ 0.05,** P ≤ 0.01,*** P ≤ 0.001, unpaired two-tailed 
t-test (b) and paired two-tailed t-test (f).Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 27
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFig. 3 |. Phagocytosis upregulates Ins2 expression in the RPE.
a, Representative image of three independent experiments showing immunofluorescence 
analysis with anti-rhodopsin (magenta) on retina sections 2 h after light onset (peak 
phagocytosis time) from fed and starved (10–14 h) mice. Sections were counterstained with 
4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (blue). RPE is outlined in white. b, Flow cytometry-
based phagocytosis assay on isolated fixed and permeabilized RPE stained with rhodopsin, 
from fed or starved mice, obtained 2 h after light onset. Phagocytosis was measured as 
% of rhodopsin+ RPE within total RPE. n = 3 mice per condition. c, RT–PCR for Ins2 
expression in RPE from fed mice at different times of the day. Lights on at 6:00 and lights 
off at 20:00. n = 8, 7, 7, 7, 3 and 3 mice used for times of 5:00, 6:00, 8:00, 15:00, 20:00 
and 1:00, respectively. FC, fold change. d, InsR immunoprecipitated from retina lysates, 
at different times of day from overnight starved control and Ins2 KO mice, were probed 
using phospho-specific InsR antibodies. The same retina lysates were probed for GLUT4. 
Values were normalized to the average of control across all time points. n = 3 mice for each 
time point. e, Schematic of phagocytic receptors used in POS recognition (left). RT–PCR 
for Ins2 in RPE isolated from WT and MerTK  KO or CD36  KO mice 2 h after light onset 
(right). n = 10 and 11 mice for WT versus MerTK  KO and n = 6 and 5 mice for WT 
versus CD36  KO. f, Phagocytosis quantification using flow cytometry on isolated RPE from 
WT and MerTKCR mice (middle). n = 3 mice used per genotype. RT–PCR measuring Ins2 
expression in isolated RPE from WT and MerTKCR (right). n = 14 and 10 mice for WT 
and MerTKCR, respectively. Plots are presented as in Fig. 1. * P ≤ 0.05,** P ≤ 0.01,*** P 
≤ 0.001, **** P ≤ 0.0001, one-way ANOV A ( c), two-way ANOV A with Tukey’s multiple 
comparisons test ( d), unpaired two-tailed t-test (e,f RT–PCR) and paired two-tailed t-test (f 
phagocytosis quantification).Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 28
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFig. 4 |. Loss of Ins2 decreases glucose uptake and alters retinal homeostasis.
a, Schematic of PET imaging (left). Parametric [18F]FDG glucose PET Ki uptake map in 
the eye of control and Ins2 KO mice (middle). Red intensity indicates glucose uptake in 
tissue and blue intensity indicates glucose levels in blood. Boxes outline eyes and inset 
represents a coronal view of eyes from uptake map. Quantification of glucose uptake in eyes 
of control and Ins2 KO or Best1 -Cre Ins2f/f mice using static PET imaging (right). Values 
on the y axis are % glucose uptake relative to control. n = 6 mice control and Ins2 KO, n 
= 7 mice control and Best1 -Cre Ins2f/f. *P ≤ 0.05, unpaired t-test. b, Snap shots of dynamic 
in vivo PET imaging for [18F]FDG glucose uptake in the eye at 36, 60, 300 and 1,800 
seconds after [18F]FDG injection. Red intensity indicates glucose uptake. c, Quantification 
of glucose levels in isolated retina of fed or starved control, Ins2 KO or Best1-Cre Ins2f/f 
mice using luciferase glucose detection assay. Values on the y axis are presented as % of 
glucose relative to control. n = 4 starved control and Ins2 KO mice, n = 8 starved control and 
Best1-Cre Ins2f/f mice, n = 6 fed control and Ins2 KO and n = 9 fed control and Best1-Cre 
Ins2f/f mice. * P ≤ 0.05 permutation test, ** P ≤ 0.01 unpaired t-test. d, Schematic of lactate 
generation in photoreceptors (left). Quantification of lactate in isolated retina of fed or 
starved control mice, Ins2 KO or Best1-Cre Ins2f/f mice, using luciferase lactate detection 
assay. Values on the y axis are % lactate relative to control. n = 10 mice used for starved 
control and Ins2 KO, n = 4 and 3 mice for starved control and Best1-Cre Ins2f/f and n = 
3 mice fed control and Best1-Cre Ins2f/f. *P ≤ 0.05 unpaired t-test for Ins2 KO, * P ≤ 0.05 
nonparametric Mann–Whitney U-test for Best1-Cre Ins2f/f. Plots are presented as in Fig. 1.Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 29
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFig. 5 |. Ins2 regulates retinal metabolic homeostasis and retinal disease.
a, Schematic of untargeted metabolomics of retinas and RPE from starved WT and Ins2 KO 
mice (left). V olcano plot from untargeted metabolomics of retinas representing statistically 
enriched or reduced metabolites in retinas of control mice relative to those of Ins2 KO 
(right) using Fisher’s exact test. FDR P < 0.1 in red, absolute value of the log2 fold change 
(FC) of 0.3 (1.2 fold change) in orange and blue meets both criteria. Data are representative 
of four biological replicates. b, Schematic of select glucose-dependent metabolic pathways 
in photoreceptors (right). Aerobic glycolysis in photoreceptors leads to the production of 
lactate from glucose. Glucose in photoreceptors can be converted to serine, which is crucial 
for glycine production and the folate methionine cycle. Metabolomic analysis reveals that 
these metabolites are decreased in Ins2 KO retinas compared to WT (left). * P < 0.05, ** P < 
0.01 two-sided Wald two-sample t-test. Data are representative of four biological replicates. 
c, Schematic of scotopic ERG on mouse retina to detect visual processing in response to 
light (top). Quantification of b-wave amplitude in ERG of WT and Ins2 KO mice under fed 
and starved condition (bottom). Representative ERG traces for control and Ins2 KO (bottom 
right) n = 8 mice for WT, n = 4 mice for Ins2 KO mice. * P ≤ 0.05 two-way ANOV A 
with Fisher’s LSD test. d, Schematic of the rd1 mouse model of retinitis pigmentosa (left). 
Representative image of immunofluorescence on the center retina of 8-week-old rd1 and 
Ins2 KO.rd1 mice using antibodies against arrestin in cone cells (top). Thresholding of 
immunofluorescence images (bottom), where pixels above a certain value are replaced with 
a black pixel. Quantification of the number of cones located in the center retina of rd1 and 
Ins2 KO.rd1 mice (right). n = 4 mice for both genotypes. * P ≤ 0.05 unpaired t-test. Plots are 
presented as in Fig. 1.Iker Etchegaray et al. Page 30
Nat Metab . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 26.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript