IRD panels-caveat emptor-truly know your IRD panel
Jose S. Pulido1,2,3, Rebecca Procopio1, Hiram Jimenez Davila1, Nicholas Bello1, Cristy 
Ku4, Mark E Pennesi4, Paul Yang4, Aaron Nagiel5, Omar A. Mahroo6, Tomas S. Aleman7, 
Ezequiel M. Salido8, Margaret Reynolds9
1Department of Ophthalmology, Wills Eye Hospital, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 
19107, USA.
2Department of Ophthalmology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street, SW, Rochester, MN 55905 USA.
3Department of Molecular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street, SW, Rochester, MN 55905 
USA.
4Department of Ophthalmology, Casey Eye Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, 
Portland, OR 97239, USA.
5The Vision Center, Children’s Hospital Los Angeles, USC Roski Eye Institute, Keck School of 
Medicine University of Southern California
6UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, UK; Moorfields Eye Hospital 
NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK; Department of Ophthalmology, Guy’s & St Thomas’ 
NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK; Section of Ophthalmology, King’s College London, UK; 
Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
7Scheie Eye Institute at the Perelman Center for Advance Medicine and the Center for 
Advanced Retinal and Ocular Therapeutics (CAROT), Department of Ophthalmology, University 
of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA; The Children’s Hospital of 
Philadelphia (CHOP), Philadelphia, PA, USA.
8Department of Biochemistry, Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, West Virginia University, 
Morgantown, West Virginia 26506
9Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University in St. Louis. St. 
Louis, Missouri, USA.
Keywords
Inherited eye disease; retinal dystrophy; gene panel; gene testing; pathogenic variant; next 
generation sequencing (NGS)
Corresponding author: Margaret M. Reynolds, MD, Departments of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences and Pediatrics, St. Louis 
Children’s Hospital, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, One Children’s Place St. Louis, MO 63110, 
Margaret.reynolds@wustl.edu. 
Financial disclosures: no relevant financial disclosures from any author
Competing interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Retina . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Retina . 2022 January 01; 42(1): 1–3. doi:10.1097/IAE.0000000000003319.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptLess than a decade ago, genetic testing in inherited retinal disease (IRD) patients was reliant 
on coverage by payors, which resulted in a very low rate of genotyping. Some tertiary 
centers offered options for non-CLIA certified genetic testing on a research basis, but this 
was not widely available to community practitioners, and research results could not be 
disclosed clinically. Fortunately, the cost of genetic testing has decreased markedly and 
the bioinformatics has improved as well. The number of genes covered in a typical next 
generation sequencing (NGS) panel has more than tripled over the past decade to more than 
300 genes. Currently, there are multiple labs offering these large panels, but with variations 
in the number of genes covered and in specific cases, also the coverage of key genes. 
Figure 1 demonstrates the overlap between five major panels as of June 1st 2021. Now some 
companies are offering the panel testing “for free”. While the ability to solve the genetic 
cause of disease in patients has been a valuable addition, we would like to point out some 
potential pitfalls in their use with the hope of raising awareness with providers who order 
these tests.
Stone et al. have extensively discussed the problem of false discovery rate.1 With the number 
of tests that are involved in a panel and the number of possible variants per test, the chances 
of finding a positive test that is unrelated to the pathology is high. Stone et al. calculated that 
if 301 non-mitochondrial genes are tested, the false discovery rate would be 128%, or 1.28 
plausible disease-causing mutations per person.1 Therefore, careful pre-, and in some cases, 
post-test phenotyping is crucial to interpreting genetic test results, especially when large 
panels are utilized. A comprehensive, multimodal characterization that includes a detailed 
clinical history, and, depending on the case, fundus photos, autofluorescence imaging, visual 
fields, full-field psychophysics and electroretinograms will help avoid spurious conclusions 
and increase the chances that a “positive” genetic test really is the underlying cause of 
the pathology. Obtaining a pedigree and evaluating family members helps to determine if 
the mode of inheritance is autosomal recessive, autosomal dominant, X-linked recessive, 
X-linked dominant, or mitochondrial. In cases where the proband has more than one 
presumed pathogenic variant, analyzing clinical data and family members—both affected 
and unaffected—can help determine the implications of these variants.
Physicians should be wary when genetic testing results do not comport with the clinical 
findings. For example, the finding of variants in an autosomal recessive gene should 
arouse suspicion when the patient has a strong family history of X-linked disease, or 
conversely, physicians should keep an open mind for the possibility of an X-linked or 
mitochondrial disease in families with a family history suggestive of autosomal dominant 
(or even recessive) inheritance. It is also important to consider the possibility of an 
autosomal dominant disorder with incomplete penetrance in a patient with no apparently 
affected family members, in whom autosomal recessive inheritance has been presumed. 
(For example, variants in PRPF31  are a frequent cause of autosomal dominant RP, and 
incomplete penetrance is frequently encountered.) Finally, the finding of a non-syndromic 
gene should be viewed cautiously in the context of a patient with multisystem features. 
However, it is also crucial to maintain an open mind and realize that common genes 
might sometimes present in uncommon or previously unrecognized manners, although often 
reflecting common phenotypes modulated by disease severity, and thus, by the window 
in time within the natural course of the disease when patients are examined. There are a Pulido et al. Page 2
Retina . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptgrowing number of genes previously reported only in syndromic retinal degenerations that 
are now being associated with non-syndromic disease (e.g. BBS , CLN , etc.)2,3
Another important aspect that has not been discussed in depth in the literature is the range 
of the panel genes tested. Looking at the list from each company is initially daunting since 
they appear to be so overwhelming and complete. However, ocular disease panels can vary 
widely in testing strategy, with some including mitochondrial genes, copy number variant 
detection, deep intronic sequencing, or testing for large insertions or deletions. As important 
as not making a false discovery is not obtaining a false negative. False negatives can 
occur from inadequate knowledge of all of the variants associated with a disease type. An 
important example are the hypomorphic variants of ABCA4  that were initially disregarded 
because they are relatively common in the Northern European population.4 Recently these 
variants have been deemed to confer a milder form of the disease.4 On the other hand, 
ABCA4- associated IRDs are also an example of the possibility for false positives calls. With 
a relatively high prevalence of disease- causing and hypomorphic variants in the general 
population, there is a risk for attributing disease to mono-allelic changes, whilst these may 
be incidental; again, the specificity of the phenotype is important.
False negatives can also occur if a specific panel does not test for a gene of interest. An 
interesting illustration of this situation is testing for the RPGR  gene, which is well known 
to the field and for which there are four ongoing gene therapy clinical trials. This gene 
causes 40–70% of all cases of X-linked RP.1,5–8 Additionally, in a series from the USA 
and from the UK, RPGR  was the third most common cause of inherited retinal disease 
behind ABCA4  and RHO ,1,9 accounting for 6% of all IRD cases.1 The issue with RPGR 
is that exon 15 is difficult to sequence with present techniques.10,11 At least one “free” 
panel does not include it in its large list of tested genes. Imagine therefore, a male patient 
with severe RP in his early 30s without a notable family history who undergoes testing to 
determine if there is a chance that his children will have the disease. If the results of genetic 
testing are inconclusive, he will be told that the chances that the children will be affected 
is low because it probably is an autosomal recessive disease. However, an isolated case in 
a man is an AD or an X-linked disorder in 5 to 10% of cases. In this case, if his disease 
is from a mutation in RPGR  and it was not in the panel, he will not undergo appropriate 
counseling regarding the implications for his offspring and siblings. Although a male with 
RPGR -associated disease cannot pass on the variant to a son, his daughters will be obligate 
carriers, and might be variably affected. He may also have female relatives of child-bearing 
age for whom establishing carrier status might have implications in terms of consideration of 
prenatal or preimplantation genetic diagnosis.
Identifying the causative mutation is often viewed as the last step when in reality it is only 
the first, after which counseling the patient and family regarding rehabilitation, progression 
and treatment possibilities is a highly individualized science. It is also beneficial for the 
family to understand the limitations of the test, i.e. a panel test does not test every gene. One 
of the most challenging aspects in this field is to explain, after-the-fact, to the patient, often 
an entire family, the meaning of variants of unknown significance. The possibility should be 
given careful consideration, anticipated, and explained beforehand as part of the process of 
ordering ‘all-inclusive’ panels. It can be helpful for the ordering physician to work with a Pulido et al. Page 3
Retina . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptgenetic counselor who can provide additional support in ensuring that the appropriate panel 
is chosen and the patient understands the results in context. In fact, counseling is included 
with one of the “free” testing programs.
In summary, although the cost of testing is decreasing and the ability to determine a genetic 
cause is increasing, it is paramount that the ordering physician be knowledgeable of the 
limitations of the positive as well as the supposedly negative results. Both the genes and 
variants that are known to be associated with disease are rapidly changing, and the panels 
are constantly undergoing changes themselves. It is therefore incumbent on the doctor who 
orders the test to understand the limitations of whichever panel he or she chooses.
References:
1. Stone EM, Andorf JL, Whitmore SS, et al. Clinically Focused Molecular Investigation of 1000 
Consecutive Families with Inherited Retinal Disease. Ophthalmology 2017;124(9):1314–1331. 
[PubMed: 28559085] 
2. Ku CA, Hull S, Arno G, et al. Detailed clinical phenotype and molecular genetic findings in CLN3-
associated isolated retinal degeneration. JAMA Ophthalmol 2017;135(7): 749–760. [PubMed: 
28542676] 
3. Weihbrecht K, Goar WA, Pak T, et al. Keeping an Eye on Bardet-Biedl Syndrome: A 
Comprehensive Review of the Role of Bardet-Biedl Syndrome Genes in the Eye. Med Res Arch 
2017;5(9).
4. Zernant J, Lee W, Collison FT, et al. Frequent hypomorphic alleles account for a significant 
fraction of ABCA4 disease and distinguish it from age-related macular degeneration. J Med Genet 
2017;54(6):404–412. [PubMed: 28446513] 
5. Sharon D, Sandberg MA, Rabe VW, Stillberger M, Dryja TP, Berson EL. RP2 and RPGR Mutations 
and Clinical Correlations in Patients with X-Linked Retinitis Pigmentosa. Am J Hum Genet 
2003;73(5): 1131–1146. [PubMed: 14564670] 
6. Bader I, Brandau O, Achatz H, et al. X-linked retinitis pigmentosa: RPGR mutations in most 
families with definite X linkage and clustering of mutations in a short sequence stretch of exon 
ORF15. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003;44(4): 1458–1463. [PubMed: 12657579] 
7. Shu X, Black GC, Rice JM, et al. RPGR mutation analysis and disease: An update. Hum Mutat 
2007;28(4):322–328. [PubMed: 17195164] 
8. Pelletier V , Jambou M, Delphin N, et al. Comprehensive survey of mutations in RP2 and RPGR in 
patients affected with distinct retinal dystrophies: Genotype-phenotype correlations and impact on 
genetic counseling. Hum Mutat 2007;28(1):81–91. [PubMed: 16969763] 
9. Pontikos N, Arno G, Jurkute N, et al. Genetic Basis of Inherited Retinal Disease in a Molecularly 
Characterized Cohort of More Than 3000 Families from the United Kingdom. Ophthalmology 
2020;127(10): 1384–1394. [PubMed: 32423767] 
10. Li J, Tang J, Feng Y , et al. Improved Diagnosis of Inherited Retinal Dystrophies by High-Fidelity 
PCR of ORF15 followed by Next-Generation Sequencing. J Mol Diagnostics 2016;18(6):817–824.
11. Huang XF, Wu J, Lv JN, Zhang X, Jin ZB. Identification of false-negative mutations missed by 
next-generation sequencing in retinitis pigmentosa patients: A complementary approach to clinical 
genetic diagnostic testing. Genet Med 2015;17(4):307–311. [PubMed: 25569437] 
12. Hulsen T, de Vlieg J, Alkema W. BioVenn – a web application for the comparison and visualization 
of biological lists using area-proportional Venn diagrams. BMC Genomics 2008; 9:488. [PubMed: 
18925949] 
13. Calculate and Draw Custom Venn Diagrams. 2021. Available at: http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/
webtools/Venn/ . Accessed June 2, 2021.Pulido et al. Page 4
Retina . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFigure 1. 
Venn diagram showing the genes evaluated by 5 separate companies in their IRD panels 
represented by size of the circle12Pulido et al. Page 5
Retina . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript