NEURAL REGENERATION RESEARCH ｜Vol 18｜No. 4｜April  2023｜701
NEURAL REGENERATION RESEARCH
www.nrronline.org
 ReviewAbstract  
The majority of inherited retinal degenerative diseases and dry age-related macular degeneration 
are characterized by decay of the outer retina and photoreceptors, which leads to progressive loss 
of vision. The inner retina, including second- and third-order retinal neurons, also shows aberrant 
structural changes at all stages of degeneration. Müller glia, the major glial cells maintain retinal 
homeostasis, activating and rearranging immediately in response to photoreceptor stress. These 
phenomena are collectively known as retinal remodeling and are anatomically well described, but 
their impact on visual function is less well characterized. Retinal remodeling has traditionally been 
considered a detrimental chain of events that decreases visual function. However, emerging evidence 
from functional assays suggests that remodeling could also be a part of a survival mechanism wherein 
the inner retina responds plastically to outer retinal degeneration. The visual system´s first synapses 
between the photoreceptors and bipolar cells undergo rewiring and functionally compensate to 
maintain normal signal output to the brain. Distinct classes of retinal ganglion cells remain even 
after the massive loss of photoreceptors. Müller glia possess the regenerative potential for retinal 
recovery and possibly exert adaptive transcriptional changes in response to neuronal loss. These 
types of homeostatic changes could potentially explain the well-maintained visual function observed 
in patients with inherited retinal degenerative diseases who display prominent anatomic retinal 
pathology. This review will focus on our current understanding of retinal neuronal and Müller glial 
adaptation for the potential preservation of retinal activity during photoreceptor degeneration. 
Targeting retinal self-compensatory responses could help generate universal strategies to delay 
sensory disease progression.
Key Words:  bipolar cells; electroretinography; Müller glia; photoreceptors; plasticity; retinal 
degeneration; retinal neuron; retinal remodeling; retinal ganglion cells
Introduction 
The immature retina undergoes dynamic changes in synaptic activity and 
connectivity during early development. The opening of the eye stimulates 
the maturation of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs). Light deprivation affects 
the stratification of RGC dendrites and results in permanent damage to 
visual responses (Tian and Copenhagen, 2001, 2003; Di Marco et al., 2009; 
Strettoi et al., 2022). In addition, mice with a loss of rod bipolar cells (RBCs) 
early in development were found to adjust synaptogenesis to preserve 
retinal function in dim light (Johnson et al., 2017). Similarly, the loss of a 
major cone bipolar cell (CBC) type can be fully compensated by other types 
of CBCs such that visual contrast and temporal frequency tuning is fully 
preserved by adulthood (Tien et al., 2017). The role of homeostatic plasticity 
in maintaining retinal function during development is further evidenced 
by the formation of synaptic connections between RBCs and cones in mice 
with neural retinal leucine zipper deficiency (Strettoi et al., 2004). This 
hypothesis is further supported by the preservation of retinal circuitry in mice 
with disproportionately large retinal neural cells induced by overexpressed 
antiapoptotic gene  Bcl-2  (Strettoi and Volpini, 2002). However, it is unclear 
if matured retinas demonstrate plasticity to maintain retinal function in 
degenerative diseases. 
Photoreceptor degeneration causes visual dysfunction and ultimately 
blindness in retinal disorders across all age groups. Synaptic connectivity in 
the inner retina and Müller glia processes undergo robust structural changes 
in response to photoreceptor loss. However, it is poorly known how these 
structural changes manifest in retinal function and vision. Recent studies 
suggest that mammalian retinas possess the capability of undergoing adaptive 
changes to preserve neural function during photoreceptor degeneration 
in a mouse model of retinitis pigmentosa (RP) (Leinonen et al., 2020; Fu 
et al., 2021b; Tomita et al., 2021), a rare genetic disorder characterized 
by photoreceptor loss (> 150 causal genes identified so far) (Newton and 
Megaw, 2020). This phenomenon corresponds to clinical observations that 
normal vision can be maintained for years in patients with inherited retinal 
degenerative diseases. Current ophthalmological technologies allow minimally 
invasive, longitudinal investigation of retinal function and morphology. Electroretinography (ERG) precisely records the electrical activation of the 
retina, producing data with signals corresponding to specific cellular subtypes. 
The eye´s transparency allows unrestricted examination of retinal anatomy 
using optical coherence tomography and fundoscopy. The retina is also a 
very practical target tissue for molecular biology and neuroscience research 
techniques ( Figure 1 ). These aspects contribute to the retina being one of 
the best characterized neuronal systems in our bodies. Deciphering how the 
retina adjusts to photoreceptor defects could enhance our understanding 
of sensory diseases in general. In this review, we focus on the current 
knowledge of the impacts of retinal plasticity on neuronal function. Literature 
was searched between March and June 2022 using keywords “Retinal AND 
degeneration AND vision AND remodeling OR plasticity” and “Müller AND glial 
AND reprogramming OR remodeling”, respectively.
Retinal Remodeling and Rewiring and Functional 
Consequences during Retinal Degeneration
RP , primarily characterized by rod cell death, loss of night vision, and visual 
field reduction, accounts for roughly half of inherited retinal degenerative 
diseases. Clinically prominent pathology in the central retina can be delayed 
by several years when secondary cone photoreceptor death ensues (Hartong 
et al., 2006). In the early stages of RP , the retinal neural connectivity may 
undergo remodeling in conjunction with progressive rod degeneration (Cuenca 
et al., 2014; D’Orazi et al., 2014; Pfeiffer et al., 2020; Strettoi et al., 2022).
Retinal remodeling is characterized into Phases 0 to 3 (Pfeiffer et al., 2020). 
Phase 0 represents the healthy state of the retina. Phase 1 consists of initial 
photoreceptor stress, rod degeneration, glial activation, as well as emerging 
glial and neural remodeling characterized by sprouting of rod, RBC, and 
horizontal cell (HC) processes. Specifically, rod axons begin to sprout beyond 
the outer plexiform layer (OPL) into the inner retina and can reach the inner 
limiting membrane. RBCs and rod-contacting HCs retract their dendrites 
from rods and their dendrites may find new contacts with cone pedicles. 
The ON pathway, which activates at light onset, is particularly susceptible 
to remodeling, whereas the OFF pathway, responsible for light decrements, 
1Faculty of Health Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland; 2Department of Ophthalmology, Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA
*Correspondence to:  Henri O. Leinonen, PhD, henri.leinonen@uef.fi; Zhongjie Fu, PhD, zhongjie.fu@childrens.harvard.edu.
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0388-832X (Henri O. Leinonen); https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8182-2983 (Zhongjie Fu) 
Funding: This work was supported by NIH R01EY032492, Boston Children’s Hospital (OFD/BTREC/CTREC Faculty Career Development Grant 97906, Pilot Grant 92214, and 
Ophthalmology Foundation 85010), Mass Lions Eye Foundation 87820, Blind Children’s Center 89282 (to ZF); Academy of Finland grant 346295, Finnish Eye and Tissue Bank 
Foundation, Retina Registered Association (Finland), and Sokeain Ystävät/De Blindas Vänner Registered Association (to HOL).
How to cite this article: Leinonen HO, Bull E, Fu Z (2023) Neural and Müller glial adaptation of the retina to photoreceptor degeneration. Neural Regen Res 18(4):701-707. From the Contents
Introduction 701
Retinal Remodeling and Rewiring and Functional 
Consequences during Retinal Degeneration701
Müller Glia-Derived Retina Adaptation during 
Photoreceptor Degeneration704
Conclusion 705Neural and Müller glial adaptation of the retina to 
photoreceptor degeneration
https://doi.org/10.4103/1673-5374.354511
Date of submission: May 17, 2022 
Date of decision: June 18, 2022 
Date of acceptance: July 12, 2022 
Date of web publication: September 16, 2022 Henri O. Leinonen1, *, Edward Bull2, Zhongjie Fu2, *702   ｜NEURAL REGENERATION RESEARCH ｜Vol 18｜No. 4｜April  2023
NEURAL REGENERATION RESEARCH
www.nrronline.org
 Reviewappears less susceptible to these changes. Concurrent with dendritic 
retraction from the OPL, metabotropic glutamate receptor-6 is downregulated 
in ON-RBC dendrites and can mislocalize to the RBC soma and axons (Gargini 
et al., 2007; Barhoum et al., 2008). A large proportion of RBCs and ON-CBCs 
can become “OFF-BC-like” as they start to aberrantly express ionotropic 
glutamate receptors during progressive photoreceptor degeneration (Marc 
et al., 2007; Jones et al., 2011). In Phase 2, cone death occurs. BCs become 
completely deafferented. HCs can extend dendrites backwards into the inner 
plexiform layer, and even amacrine cells and RGCs initiate sprouting (Strettoi 
and Pignatelli, 2000; Strettoi et al., 2002; Jones et al., 2003; Pfeiffer et al., 
2020). Phase 3 represents the most advanced stage when all photoreceptors 
have died, leading to neurite outgrowth by all retinal neuron classes and 
global retinal cell death. 
Unlike anatomical descriptions of remodeling, the functionality of the 
rewired retina, particularly in early disease stages, is less well understood. 
Emerging evidence suggests that early remodeling could be a manifestation 
of neuroplastic events (homeostatic plasticity) trying to retain normal light 
responses and visual function. Adaptational changes in retinal function in 
response to partial photoreceptor degeneration have been observed in 
multiple disease paradigms such as the light-induced retinal degeneration 
(LIRD) model (Richards et al., 2006; Montalban-Soler et al., 2012; Rubin et al., 
2022), the photoreceptor ablation model (Care et al., 2019, 2020), and the 
progressive retinal degeneration model (Leinonen et al., 2020). 
Retina can adapt to partial photoreceptor loss 
Inner retina function recovers after partial light-induced retinal 
degeneration
Increasing evidence of inner neural retinal plasticity in mature retinas has been suggested in the past two decades. When C57BL/6J and Balb/C cross-
bred mice are subjected to a continuous 20-day bright white light regimen 
(150–175 lux) to induce partial LIRD, there is a 50% loss in both the outer 
nuclear layer (ONL) thickness and scotopic ERG a-wave amplitude (Richards 
et al., 2006). Interestingly, the b-wave amplitude recovers to a higher 60% 
level. The negative polarity ERG a-wave represents the sum activation of 
photoreceptors, which is primarily rod-driven in scotopic conditions (Penn 
and Hagins, 1969). The positive b-wave occurs when the signal is transmitted 
from the photoreceptors to bipolar cells (Stockton and Slaughter, 1989). In 
theory, if diminished photoreceptor function directly propagates to inner 
retinal function, both ERG a- and b-wave amplitudes should decline by the 
same degree. Furthermore, the amplitude of fast frequency oscillatory 
potentials, which are believed to be mainly generated at the level of amacrine 
and ganglion cell interactions (Dong et al., 2004), initially drops significantly 
at 0–60 days post LIRD, but recovers to near normal levels by 90 days post 
LIRD (Richards et al., 2006). These observations indicate functional adaptation 
in the inner retinal circuitry during long-term LIRD. Similar observations are 
also reported in a 24-hour LIRD paradigm with a brighter light regimen (3000 
lux) in Balb/C mice, in which a permanent 30% loss of a-wave amplitude is 
reported. However, these mice also display b-waves that gradually recovered 
to near normal levels by 7 days post LIRD (Montalban-Soler et al., 2012). The 
scotopic threshold responses representing ganglion cell function (Saszik et 
al., 2002) recovered completely (Montalban-Soler et al., 2012). In Sprague-
Dawley albino rats subjected to partial LIRD, the ERG b-wave also recovered 
to over 80% of its original amplitude (Rubin et al., 2022). Moreover, inner 
neural retinal adaption may occur in large animals subjected to LIRD. In LIRD-
induced RHOT4R mutant dogs, there is a light-dose-dependent thinning of ONL 
(Iwabe et al., 2016). The visual behavior of these dogs at scotopic, mesopic, 
or photopic testing conditions (ranging from 0.003 to 65 lux) is normal as 
measured at 2 and 33 weeks post LIRD in an obstacle-avoidance behavioral 
vision testing. Taken together, following an acute phase of suppressed inner 
retina function after partial light damage, the downstream retinal circuitry 
seems to recover despite permanent sensory cell dysfunction.
Synaptic connectivity plasticity and cell migration restoration after 
controlled photoreceptor injury
In addition to LIRD, laser photocoagulation has also been used to injure 
the outer retina structures while leaving the inner retina without directly 
applied damage (Sher et al., 2013; Beier et al., 2017). In rabbit retinas with 
laser-induced injury specifically in RPE/photoreceptors, the lesion site heals 
as evidenced by the migration of adjacent photoreceptors to occupy the 
lesion site. The migrating photoreceptors establish new functional synaptic 
connections with local bipolar cells. The visual sensitivity of RGCs at the 
lesion site recovers to baseline levels after 2 months (Sher et al., 2013). 
Importantly, typical remodeling events include deafferentation of RBCs, 
followed by sprouting and formation of ectopic synapses in the ONL, which 
typically occur immediately following injury (Beier et al., 2017). However, 
as healthy photoreceptors continuously migrated into the lesion site, RBCs 
abandon aberrant connections to favor properly formed local synapses at 
the OPL. In the retinas of ground squirrels subjected to photocoagulation 
(Beier et al., 2018), there is a remarkable capability of the adult retina 
for selective circuit repair, as expanded short-wavelength sensitive cone   
(S-cone) connecting CBCs dendritic trees bypass the closely related medium-
wavelength sensitive cones to selectivity synapse with their correct target, 
the S-cones. The adult retina’s propensity for synaptic plasticity is further 
corroborated in the Cngb1neo/neo mouse RP model, which lacks a crucial CNGB1 
protein for phototransduction (Wang et al., 2019). CNGB1 defects lead to 
diminished ERG a- and b-wave amplitudes, attenuated b-wave sensitivity, as 
well as severely mislocalized and malformed synaptic contacts between rods 
and RBCs. When CNGB1 expression is recovered in young adult Cngb1neo/neo 
mice, photoreceptor degeneration is halted, rod-RBC synapse organization 
is corrected, and light sensitivity at RBCs and RGCs is significantly recovered, 
highlighting the capability of the adult retina for restorative synaptic plasticity.
 
The inner retina functionally compensates for partial photoreceptor loss
To further investigate how the adult retina functionally responds to partial 
rod or cone death, a selective cell ablation model using the cre-recombinase 
mediated diphtheria toxin receptor insertion technique has been applied 
(Care et al., 2019, 2020). Following the loss of half of the rod population in 
otherwise healthy adult mice, three possible functional outcomes have been 
hypothesized: (1) input loss from rods could directly propagate through the 
circuit leading to a matching defect in retinal output; (2) functional defects 
could be exacerbated in downstream circuitry leading to an even larger 
decrease in retinal output as predicted from magnitude of rod loss; or, (3) 
input loss could be compensated in downstream circuitry so that retina 
output is stronger than expected from the extent of rod loss (Care et al., 
2020). Full-field ERGs and patch-clamp recordings at RBCs and RGCs have 
shown that hypothesis 3 is most likely. First, mean spiking activity recorded 
at AON-S RGCs to flashes of light is reduced by only 20%, although the average 
loss of rods in the experiment is 60%. Furthermore, AON-S RGC sensitivity 
to dim light flashes appears to increase compared to the values of normal 
controls. Secondly, scotopic ERG b-wave amplitude is much less reduced than 
the a-wave amplitude (Care et al., 2020), similar to what has been shown 
after partial rod death due to LIRD (Richards et al., 2006; Montalban-Soler et 
al., 2012; Rubin et al., 2022). To elucidate the locus of the apparent functional 
compensation, Care et al. (2020) have also patched and recorded individual 
RBCs. Voltage responses from RBCs remain intact despite marked rod loss, 
which further confirms compensation occurring at the rod-RBC synapses. 
Compensatory changes and maintained visual function are also observed Figure 1｜Schematics of retinal structure and established technologies for retina 
research. 
(A) The transparency of the eye allows direct visual access to the retina, which is the 
only neural tissue that is exposed to visual inspection noninvasively. (B) The layered and 
strictly hierarchical architecture of the retina is arguably the best characterized neural 
system in our bodies. (C) Electroretinogram (ERG) is a minimally invasive method to 
inspect sensory neuron (photoreceptor) activation (a-wave) and synaptic transmission 
to interneurons (b-wave). (D) Optical coherence tomography (OCT) allows segmentation 
of the retina noninvasively. (E) Scanning laser ophthalmoscopy (SLO) allows high-
resolution images of vasculature. (F) Several advanced retina imaging methods using 
fluorescence, including 2-photon excitation, are established. (G) Dissected and perfused 
live retina is highly amenable to electrophysiology by e.g. multielectrode arrays (MEA) 
and patch-clamp, and (H) to assessment of metabolism. (I) Retina’s distinctly layered 
anatomy renders histological inspection and immunohistochemistry very practical. RGCL: 
Retinal ganglion cell layer; IPL: inner plexiform layer; INL: inner nuclear layer; OPL: outer 
plexiform layer; ONL: outer nuclear layer. (J) Single-cell transcriptomics maps gene profile 
at specific cells. (K) Established methods exist for preparation of primary cell cultures 
of several main cell classes in the retina. Graphs A, B, E, F, G, H, and K were adapted/
reprinted from “Eye and Retina schematics”, “Diabetic Retinopathy Hallmarks”, “Rodent 
Fundoscopy”, “Retina MEA”, “Retinal ganglion cell patch clamp”, “Metabolic Assays -Using 
Seahorse Analyzers” and “Primary Cell Culture Preparation” with BioRender.com (2022). 
Retrieved from https://app.biorender.com/biorender-templates (license #: ZR241JTGY4, 
BU241JTVMS, NW241JU576, AQ241JUC41, LR241JUJWJ, JB241JVDIA, RD241JUX5O). 
Graphs C, D, I, and J present unpublished data from the Leinonen Retina Laboratory.
A B
C G
D
E
F H KJINEURAL REGENERATION RESEARCH ｜Vol 18｜No. 4｜April  2023｜703
NEURAL REGENERATION RESEARCH
www.nrronline.org
 ReviewFigure 2｜Near normal rod-dependent visual contrast sensitivity remains for several 
months in retinitis pigmentosa mice. 
(A) Representative optical coherence tomography (OCT) images showing degeneration 
progression in P23H  mice. (B) Mean outer nuclear layer (ONL, photoreceptor nuclei 
layer) thickness as measured at 500 µm from the optic nerve head at dorsal, ventral, 
nasal, and temporal retinal quadrants. (C) Representative ex vivo ERG responses for dim 
flash (17 photons/µm2) in GNAT2–/– control and GNAT2–/–/P23H  retinitis pigmentosa mice 
at baseline and after DL-AP4 perfusion to isolate rod-specific response. (D) Rod bipolar 
cells (RBC) and rod response amplitudes. RBC response was acquired offline by digitally 
subtracting the rod-specific response from the basal response. (E) RBC/rod response 
ratio. (F, G) Visual contrast thresholds as measured by optomotor responses (OMR) in 
2–3-month-old (F) and 5–6-month-old (G) mice. Note the abrupt drop in ERGs and OMR 
performance between 5 and 6 months of age in GNAT2–/–/P23H  mice. Adapted from 
Leinonen et al. (2020).after the loss of half of the cone population in adult mice (Care et al., 2019; 
Lee et al., 2022). These latter reports are challenged by the findings that cone 
pathway function recovers to normal levels when half of the cones are ablated 
in juvenile mice at postnatal day (P)10, but not when the same procedure is 
performed in matured mice retinas at P30 (Shen et al., 2020). This highlights 
the well-known dogma of the lower capability for neuroplasticity in adulthood 
compared to juvenility, which is also recapitulated in retinal tissue. Therefore, 
while retinal remodeling is capable of adjusting to retinal degeneration 
in adult mice after postnatal development, the extent of this plasticity is 
variable.
High inner retina activation and visual responses can coincide with 
progressive retinal degeneration 
The hypothesis of whether functional compensation in the retina could occur 
during progressive retinal degeneration has also been tested (Leinonen et 
al., 2020). ONL thickness and rod-driven ERG responses are lost by around 
75% at 5 months of age in heterozygous P23H mice ( Figure 2 ; Leinonen et 
al., 2020). Despite the robust ongoing rod degenerative disease occurring 
alongside global retinal inflammation and oxidative stress (Leinonen et 
al., 2020; Fu et al., 2021b; Ortega et al., 2022), visual contrast sensitivity 
remains well-maintained up until 5 months of age (Leinonen et al., 2020). 
This is true even in P23H  mice bred on a  Gnat2–/– background that eliminates 
cone phototransduction and renders the mice reliant on their rod-function. 
Mass RBC responses derived from ex vivo  ERG recordings showed increased 
relative sensitivity (Leinonen et al., 2020), which mirrors prior findings 
(Care et al., 2020). The functional compensatory changes in P23H  mouse 
retinas are accompanied by transcriptomic profile shifts that indicate robust 
cellular restructuring and neural plasticity with “cell adhesion molecules”, 
“axon guidance” and “glutamatergic synapse” being among the top 10 most 
upregulated KEGG pathways. Importantly, the decorrelation of scotopic ERG a- 
and b-waves, i.e. increased amplitude ratio of b to a, has also been observed 
in P23H  rats (Machida et al., 2000; Aleman et al., 2001). However, visual 
performance in RP can decay nonlinearly as exemplified by abrupt loss of RBC 
responses and contrast sensitivity between 5 and 6 months in GNAT2–/–/P23H  
mice ( Figure 2 ; Leinonen et al., 2020). This needs to be taken into account 
when designing therapeutic interventions.
Behavioral vision in a genetic retinal degenerative diseases model has also 
been tested closer to the terminal disease stage. Peripherin-2 deficient 
Rds mice never generate fully formed photoreceptor outer segments and 
express only approximately 3% of normal opsin content, which should lead 
to a similar extent of photon catch loss. However, ERG b-wave amplitudes are 
recorded at approximately 15% of normal levels, suggesting compensatory 
signal gain between photoreceptor and bipolar cells in these mice (Thompson 
et al., 2014). Although optokinetic tracking and visual water task behavior are 
severely compromised in Rds mice as expected, they still exhibit distinct and 
meaningful pattern vision despite minimal rod and cone function. In addition, 
RBCs display normal sensitivity to local application of exogenous glutamate in 
patch-clamp experiments in 2-month-old Rd10  retinas (Barhoum et al., 2008). 
This finding is remarkable as 2-month-old Rd10  mouse retinas are completely 
devoid of rods and show notable metabotropic glutamate receptor-6 
downregulation in RBCs.
RGCs remain relatively stable during progressive retinal degenerative 
diseases, but several aspects of high-fidelity vision decline
In heterozygous P23H  rats, receptive field strength declines immediately 
upon ONL degeneration (Sekirnjak et al., 2009, 2011). The rod-driven light 
responses in RGCs as well as receptive field size start to decline relatively late, 
only after P200, and RGCs spontaneous firing peaks at the same time. In Royal 
College of Surgeons rats at a disease stage when nearly all rods have died 
but most cones remain, RGC receptive field distortion is primarily linked with 
anatomic holes in cone mosaic and cone structural changes, rather than inner 
retina remodeling (Yu et al., 2017). Importantly, all the functionally diverse 
RGCs characterized in the study persist after rod death. However, although 
direction-selective RGCs remain in Royal College of Surgeons rats, their 
direction tuning broadens and direction selectivity decreases.  
Moreover, some electrophysiology studies focusing on the midbrain targeting 
the superior colliculus (SC), dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus, or primary visual 
cortex (V1) function have suggested that RGC’s operation mode during retinal 
degenerative disease directly propagates to these brain targets (Fransen et al., 
2015; Procyk et al., 2019; Leinonen et al., 2022). Recordings from the P23H  
rat superior colliculus demonstrate the loss of light responsivity in ON cells 
that practically coincide with input loss (Fransen et al., 2015). In contrast, OFF 
responses become supernormal and progressively elevate above wild-type 
levels. Recordings of the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus in 3–5-week-old  Rd1 
mice, at a disease stage with complete loss of rods and partial loss of cones, 
demonstrate diminished ON cell responses and slightly declined receptive 
field sizes (Procyk et al., 2019). However, cone contrast sensitivity remains 
intact at this relatively advanced disease stage. In 2-month-old  S334ter-3  rats 
at a disease stage when most rods are dead but cones remain, even when 
responses to pattern stimuli recorded at V1 have declined at medium-to-high 
contrasts, the contrast sensitivity as measured by the C50 parameter shows 
no deterioration (Chen et al., 2020). Similarly, excellent pattern contrast 
sensitivity in V1 single-unit recordings in young adult P23H  mice has been 
shown, although several other receptive field properties are altered compared 
to wild-type mice (Leinonen et al., 2022). In summary, RGC physiology 
inevitably changes during photoreceptor degenerative disease and functional 
consequences propagate into the visual areas of the brain. The adult human 
visual cortex may also be sufficiently plastic to adapt to altered visual inputs (Lunghi et al., 2019; Castaldi et al., 2020). Still, many aspects of visual function 
remain unexpectedly stable, with contrast sensitivity particularly remaining 
strikingly resistant to retinal degeneration in animal models.
Does hyperexcitability in the inner retina counteract beneficial effects of 
rewiring?
A major issue that could discount the functional benefits of the apparent 
retinal adaptation to photoreceptor loss is the simultaneously increasing 
spontaneous neural activity that can worsen neural signal-to-noise ratio 
and mask light-responses. Characteristic of the severely degenerated retina 
is spontaneous, rhythmic oscillatory waves which physiological meaning 
has not yet been fully characterized. Although these oscillatory waves are 
generally recorded at the level of RGCs, they are not intrinsic to RGCs, but 
rather originate presynaptically (Borowska et al., 2011). They appear at two 
distinct, dominant frequencies. The less characterized are slow, sub-3 Hz 
oscillations that are believed to originate from spontaneous Ca2+ transients 
in remnant cones as a direct consequence of synaptic remodeling and 
decreased negative feedback by HCs (Haq et al., 2014). The fast approximately 
10 Hz oscillations arise from CBC-AII amacrine cell network activity, which is 
independent of input from the degenerating outer retina (Borowska et al., 
2011) and is believed to be dependent on voltage-gated Na+ channels and 
gap junctional coupling (Trenholm et al., 2012). The increased spontaneous 
oscillations likely incur detrimental effects on vision as their pharmacologic 
suppression improves light responses and stimulation efficiency recorded 
at RGCs (Toychiev et al., 2013; Barrett et al., 2015; Gehlen et al., 2020).  
F GC D EB A704   ｜NEURAL REGENERATION RESEARCH ｜Vol 18｜No. 4｜April  2023
NEURAL REGENERATION RESEARCH
www.nrronline.org
 ReviewMoreover, inner retinal neurons can also increase spontaneous spiking 
(become hyperexcitable) during photoreceptor degeneration. This can occur 
early in disease progression and appears to propagate into the visual areas of 
the brain (Drager and Hubel, 1978; Leinonen et al., 2022). After investigation 
of RGC’s responses during RP progression in Rd1 and Rd10  mouse retinas, 
increased spontaneous RGC firing in parallel with decreased light responses 
was found (Telias et al., 2019). The light responses at RGCs are normal before 
degeneration onset in P14 Rd10  mice, but at P28, RGC’s spontaneous activity 
increases by 2–3-fold and light-responses decrease by half. The hyperactivity 
in Rd10  mouse RGCs is intrinsic as blocking all synaptic drive to RGCs does 
not decrease hyperactivity. Based on an extensive series of pharmacological 
and genetic experiments that either increased or decreased retinoic acid 
signaling, the researchers have shown causative evidence that increased 
retinoic acid signaling in the retina could explain RGC hyperexcitability during 
progressive retinal degenerative diseases (Telias et al., 2019) and after laser-
induced local photoreceptor ablation (Denlinger et al., 2020). Suppression of 
retinoic acid signaling remarkably improves luminance-detection and pattern 
vision in  Rd10  mice (Telias et al., 2019, 2022), revealing a novel drug target to 
improve vision in RP . 
An intriguing hypothesis is that increased retinal electrical activity upon 
retinal degeneration is part of a survival mechanism, as loss of input is known 
to lead to neuronal death whereas increased activity enhances longevity 
(Corredor and Goldberg, 2009). Therefore, long-term effects of interventions 
aimed at either increasing or decreasing the electrical activity need to be 
carefully assessed. It will also be important for future studies to elucidate 
whether increased synaptic gain at the rod-RBC synapse and increased inner 
retina hyperexcitability in RP retinas share the same mechanistic origin, as it 
could have significant implications for prospective therapies.
Müller Glia-Derived Retina Adaptation during 
Photoreceptor Degeneration
Metabolic adaptation
Müller glial cells span all retinal layers, providing structural and trophic 
support for neighboring neurons. In response to injury, Müller glia are 
activated and releases antioxidants and neurotrophic factors to preserve 
retinal function from further damage at early stages (Bringmann et al., 
2009). However, prolonged gliosis is detrimental as the ability of Müller 
glia to support retinal neurons becomes disrupted. Müller glia may also 
produce lactate, lipoproteins, and glutamine, which are then shuttled to 
photoreceptors for synapse formation and energy production (Fu et al., 
2021a). In healthy retinas, Müller glia have a very homogenous metabolic 
signature, which becomes highly variable in the levels of glutamine, 
glutamate, taurine, and glutamine synthetase among neighboring Müller glia 
in the region of the degenerating retina (Pfeiffer et al., 2016). 
Recent single-cell transcriptomics shows decreased expression of genes 
involved in metabolism in both rods and cones in P23H  mice during early 
photoreceptor loss. These analyses also show increased expression of genes 
involved in mitochondrial localization and microtubule-based transfer in 
Müller glia (Tomita et al., 2021), suggesting possible transfer of mitochondria 
from Müller glia to photoreceptors or increased energy production in Müller 
glia. Although the mechanisms of mitochondrial release are unclear, brain 
astrocytes shuttle mitochondria to injured neurons after stroke (Hayakawa et 
al., 2016). Decreased photoreceptor metabolism accelerates photoreceptor 
loss; therefore, improving glucose supply and uptake could promote the 
photoreceptor survival in degenerating mouse retinas (Punzo et al., 2009; 
Ait-Ali et al., 2015). Therefore, the question arises of whether Müller glia 
can compensate for photoreceptor energy shortage during early retinal 
degeneration. 
Our current knowledge of Müller glia metabolic fuel sources is still quite 
limited. Most of the current literature relies on in vitro  studies, making it 
difficult to fully characterize Müller glial metabolic properties, as the normal 
cell interactions between Müller glia with their connecting cells is lost. 
Furthermore, Müller glial cells in vitro  are positive for GFAP , which reflects 
gliosis and fails to capture their diverse pathophysiology in the retina (Fu et 
al., 2021a). A recent report has shown that loss of hexokinase 2 (catalyzes the 
first step in glycolysis) and phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (an endogenous 
serine synthetic gene), but not pyruvate dehydrogenase E1 alpha 1 (catalyzes 
the conversion of pyruvate into acetyl-CoA) and lactate dehydrogenase A 
(catalyzes the interconversion of pyruvate and L-lactate) in Müller glia leads 
to photoreceptor degeneration and reduced retinal neuronal function (Shen 
et al., 2021), suggesting that Müller glia may use glucose to produce serine 
to supply photoreceptors. Consequently, photoreceptors convert glucose to 
lactate to fuel Müller glia (Kanow et al., 2017). The contribution of cellular 
metabolic changes to cell fate decisions warrants extensive investigation. 
Illustrating the importance of this concept, targeting metabolic modulation via 
nutrient supplementation is a feasible approach to treat retinal degeneration 
(Rowe et al., 2021). 
Remodeling 
Müller glial activation facilitates the adaptive retinal remodeling as the 
hypertrophied glial cell processes may guide neuronal migration and aberrant 
neuronal cell process sprouting to maintain visual function (Bringmann et al., 
2009; Fu et al., 2021b). Following the loss of photoreceptors, glial scars are 
formed between the remnant neural retina and RPE/choroid to fill the retinal 
breaks. The initial purpose of glial scars is to protect the neuroretina from further damage. However, glial scars also account for the failure of tissue 
repair and therapeutic intervention. 
In fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21)-treated P23H  mice, not only is there 
improved retinal neural function, but there is also a notable increase in the 
expression of genes involved in axon and synapse development in Müller 
glia and amacrine cells identified with single-cell transcriptomics (Fu et al., 
2021b), suggesting glial remodeling may preserve retinal function during 
photoreceptor degeneration. However, the preservation of retinal neuronal 
responses lasts for six weeks and diminishes at nine weeks of treatment. This 
could be due to the inhibitory impacts of FGF21 on RPE fatty acid oxidation, 
which may potentially cause metabolic switches in RPE and limit the fuel 
supply to photoreceptors. Further exploration of cellular interaction and 
metabolic alterations is needed. Better understanding of the molecular 
mechanisms may help prolong the beneficial effects of glial remodeling 
during photoreceptor loss.  
In addition, Müller glia produce photoreceptor components such as 11- cis-
retinol in the chicken retina and rhodopsin protein in mouse retina (Goel 
and Dhingra, 2012; Kaylor et al., 2014). In P23H mouse retinas, there is co-
expression of rod markers ( Rho and Pde6b ), cone markers ( Opn1mw  and 
Opn1sw ), and Müller glial cell markers ( Rlbp1  and Slc3a1 ) in a cluster of cells 
identified with single-cell transcriptomics. Decreased expression of genes 
involved in phototransduction, inner and outer segment, photoreceptor cell 
cilium, and photoreceptor development are found in both rods and cones 
in P23H  mouse retinas (Tomita et al., 2021). Müller glia may enhance the 
pathways involved in photoreceptor maintenance to compensate for those 
lost in rods and cones. 
Collectively, Müller glia may support photoreceptor health by providing the 
necessary proteins lost during retinal degeneration, or that Müller glia may 
undergo neurogenesis to replace degenerated photoreceptors. Further 
validation at translational and function levels is needed to test this hypothesis. 
However, Müller glia reprogramming, proliferation, and differentiation 
are well documented in zebrafish, but may not occur spontaneously in 
mammalian retinas (Salman et al., 2021). 
Reprogramming 
Zebrafish possess the ability to regenerate a damaged retina and restore 
vision (Goldman, 2014; Lahne et al., 2020). In response to retinal injury, 
multiple extrinsic signaling pathways could trigger Müller glial cell cycle-
reentry ( Figure 3A ). Growth factors and cytokines such as insulin, FGF2 (Wan 
et al., 2014), heparin-binding epidermal-like growth factor (HBEGF) (Wan et 
al., 2012), midkine-a (Nagashima et al., 2020), and tumor necrosis factor-
alpha (Nelson et al., 2013; Iribarne et al., 2019) activate the regenerative 
potential of Müller glia. Signaling pathways such as glycogen synthase kinase 
3β/β-catenin, Mapk/Erk, PI3K/Akt and Jak/signal transducer and activator of 
transcription 3 stimulates Müller glial reprogramming and retinal progenitor 
formation (Wan et al., 2014). The downstream transcriptional factor achaete-
scute complex-like 1a (Ascl1a) is a key regulator of genes involved in Müller 
glia-derived progenitor production and zebrafish retina regeneration (Fausett 
et al., 2008; Ramachandran et al., 2010, 2011). Ascl1a positively regulates 
Müller glial insulinoma-associated 1a, which in turn induces the expression of 
the cyclin-cdk inhibitor p57kip2 and suppresses cell-cycle genes (such as ccna2 , 
cdk1 , and cdk2 ), thus stimulating cell cycle exit and neural differentiation 
(Ramachandran et al., 2012). Insulinoma-associated 1a, via modulating the 
cone-rod homeobox (Crx, responsible for photoreceptor differentiation) 
and Nr2e3 (a photoreceptor-specific nuclear receptor responsible for rod 
photoreceptor specification), is required for photoreceptor differentiation in 
the developing zebrafish retinas (Forbes-Osborne et al., 2013). Meanwhile, 
suppression of the Notch signaling (Campbell et al., 2021) and transforming 
growth factor β (TGFβ) signaling (Lenkowski et al., 2013), which drive Müller 
glial differentiation and quiescence, promotes progenitor proliferation and 
retinal regeneration. Furthermore, inhibition of GABA or glutamate receptors 
also stimulates Müller glial proliferation in uninjured retinas (Rao et al., 
2017; Kent et al., 2021). Although the role of these factors might be species-
specific, some knowledge gained from zebrafish has promoted the study of 
induction of Müller glial reprogramming, proliferation, and differentiation in 
mammalian retinas. 
Unlike those in zebrafish, the reactive Müller glial cells in mice will not 
proliferate and instead return towards quiescence ( Figure 3B ). However, 
Müller glia in mammalian retinas still hold regenerative potential. As shown 
in zebrafish, modulating growth factors such as EGF and TGFβ also controls 
Müller glial progenitor cell generation in mammalian retinas. In isolated 
mouse retinal explants, EGF treatment via activation of Erk1/2 and PI3K/
Akt pathways induces Müller glial proliferation (Ueki and Reh, 2013). HBEGF 
pretreatment also stimulates Müller glial-derived progenitor cell formation 
in N-methyl-D-aspartate-damaged mouse retinas (Todd et al., 2015). TGFβ 
inhibitors further potentiate EGF-stimulated Müller glial proliferation in rat 
retinas in vivo  (Close et al., 2005). A combination of factors including FGF2, 
insulin-like growth factor 1, taurine, retinoid acid induces photoreceptor 
differentiation of human Müller stem cells in vitro ; however, TGFβ suppresses 
the process (Angbohang et al., 2016). Moreover, insulin treatment via 
increasing glucose use prolongs cone photoreceptor survival in mice with 
inherited retinal degeneration (Punzo et al., 2009). Intravitreal injection of 
both insulin and basic fibroblast growth factor induces Müller glial migration 
from the inner nuclear layer to photoreceptor layer in degenerating mouse 
retinas (Goel and Dhingra, 2021). However, migrated Müller glial cells in 
photoreceptor layer express stem cell marker Chx10 but do not further  NEURAL REGENERATION RESEARCH ｜Vol 18｜No. 4｜April  2023｜705
NEURAL REGENERATION RESEARCH
www.nrronline.org
 Review
BA
Figure 3｜Müller glial responses in retinal degeneration. 
(A) Müller glial regeneration in zebrafish. Upon injury, Müller glia undergo 
reprogramming and enter the cell cycle for proliferation, stimulated by β-catenin, Mapk/
Erk, Jak/signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (Stat3), PI3K/Akt. These 
signaling pathways further induce Ascl expression to generate Müller glial progenitor 
cells, which regenerate the injured retina. Growth factors and cytokines (such as FGF2, 
HBEGF, insulin, Midkine-a, TNFα) as well as Wnts positively stimulate the process. TGF-β, 
Notch, and neurotransmitter (GABA, glutamate) signaling negatively regulates the 
process. Adapted and updated from Salman et al. (2021). (B) In mammalian retina, the 
regeneration potential of Müller glia is limited. The activated Müller glial may undergo 
metabolic adaptation and remodeling to preserve neural retinal function. Interestingly, 
EGF and HBEGF stimulate while TGF-β suppresses Müller glial proliferation in mammalian 
retinas. Manipulation of β-catenin, Nfia/b/x, Hippo, and YAP pathways stimulates 
the generation of Müller glial progenitor cells, which can be further differentiated 
into photoreceptors upon the subsequent activation of Otx2 , Crx, and Nrl following 
the stimulation of the Wnt pathway by targeting β-catenin . The graph was adapted/
reprinted from “retinal cell (Müller glia)”, “cone photoreceptor”, “rod photoreceptor”, 
“retinal cell (ganglion 1)”, “bipolar neuron”, “retinal cell (amacrine)”, “retinal cell 
(horizontal)” by BioRender.com (2022). Retrieved from https://app.biorender.com/
biorender-templates (license #:HT240EKBMT). Ascl: Achaete-scute complex-like 1; Crx: 
cone-rod homeobox; EGF: epidermal-like growth factor; FGF2: fibroblast growth factor 
2; GABA: gamma-aminobutyric acid; HBEGF: heparin-binding epidermal-like growth 
factor; Insm1a: insulinoma-associated 1a; Jak/Stat3: Janus kinase-signal transducer and 
activator of transcription 3; Mapk/Erk: mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase; Nfia/b/x: nuclear factor I; Nrl: neural retina leucine zipper; Otx2: 
orthodenticle homeobox 2; PI3K/Akt: phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase/protein kinase B; 
TGF-β: transforming growth factor-β; TNFα: tumor necrosis factor α; YAP: yes-associated 
protein. 
differentiate into rods and cones (Goel and Dhingra, 2021). These reports 
suggest distinct impacts of growth factors and neurotransmitters on Müller 
glial proliferation and retinal regeneration in mammalian retinas.
Targeting signaling pathways is an intriguing intervention to trigger Müller 
glial reprogramming in mammalian retinas. Overexpression of Ascl1 in Müller 
glia in young mice stimulates the regeneration of amacrine and bipolar cells, 
as well as photoreceptors after N-methyl-D-aspartate or light injury (Ueki et 
al., 2015). However, this regenerative potential is dampened in adult mice. 
Müller glia have been induced to differentiate into rod photoreceptors and 
restore vision in retinal degenerative mice by firstly stimulating Wnt signaling 
(β-catenin) in 4-week-old mice and then transcriptional factors essential for 
rod induction (Crx, Otx2, and Nrl) 2 weeks later (Yao et al., 2018). In addition, 
overactivation of YAP (yes-associated protein), which interacts with EGF 
receptor signaling, induces Müller glia to reprogram into highly proliferative 
cells in adult mouse retinas (Hamon et al., 2019). Alternatively, the deletion 
of Müller glial-specific Hippo pathway components, which suppress YAP 
signaling, also results in a highly proliferative, progenitor-like cellular state 
(Rueda et al., 2019). Loss of Müller glial nuclear factor I factors a, b, x (Nifa/b/
x), which maintains glial quiescent status, leads to Ascl1  up-regulation, Müller 
glial reprogramming, and ultimately bipolar- and amacrine-like cell generation 
in adult mice after treatment with N-methyl-D-aspartate, FGF2 and insulin 
(Hoang et al., 2020). This process can be suppressed by YAP inhibition (Hoang 
et al., 2020). Targeting common signaling pathways may generate generic 
therapeutic potential for mammalian Müller glial reprogramming and retinal 
regeneration. Interestingly, a recent report shows that the hybrid resulting from fusion of 
Müller glia with adult stem cells can integrate within human retinal organoid 
and differentiate towards a neural fate (Bonilla-Pons et al., 2022). Treatment 
of a combo of small molecules (dbcAMP , Forskolin, ISX9, CHIR99021, I-
BET151, and Y -27632) in Müller glia in vitro  drives the direct reprogramming 
into bipolar-like cells (Yang et al., 2022). Further tests  in vivo  are needed 
to confirm these findings. Taken together, these findings suggest that the 
stimulation of retinal regeneration in mammals is possible. However, the 
efficiency needs to be further improved in developed retinas. The long-term 
impacts also need to be carefully evaluated, because the balance between 
the differentiative state and proliferative state is interfered with, which could 
compromise the supportive role of Müller glia in retinal neural and vascular 
function. 
Conclusion  
With these results taken together, the mature mammalian retina possesses 
some degree of plasticity that may help maintain vision during retinal 
degenerative diseases. Regarding the therapeutic potential of retinal glial 
cells, activated Müller glia benefit inner retinal neurons via producing trophic 
factors (Vecino et al., 2016). Müller glia could also enhance the pathways 
affected in photoreceptors as well as potentially improve photoreceptor 
energy supply in degenerative retinas. Supplementation of natural metabolic 
modulators that induce Müller glial remodeling helps preserve neural retinal 
function (Fu et al., 2021b). Better understanding the interaction between 
Müller glia and retinal neurons, as well as the underlying mechanisms, 
would greatly accelerate the field. Further studies regarding how to improve 
neuroplasticity during blinding diseases are warranted. Investigations 
targeting the cellular and molecular contributions to the compensatory 
neural signals are key to better understanding the disease pathogenesis. 
Further advancement of proteomics and metabolomics at a single cell level 
will further validate the results obtained from single-cell transcriptomics. 
The field could also be further advanced by the application of spatial 
transcriptomics that map the cell gene profile at specific locations within the 
retina. The application of the microfluidics 3D system, which better models 
the cell-cell interactions in in vivo  conditions, would benefit drug testing. 
Continuous efforts will be necessary to explore this field as it could lead to 
novel therapeutics that tackle the unmet medical need caused by retinal 
degeneration.  
Acknowledgments:  We thank Mr. Umair Seemab (University of Eastern 
Finland, Finland) for generating the UMAP graph in Figure 1J. We thank Ms. 
Nguyen Pham and Dr. Frans Vinberg (University of Utah, USA) for recording 
and providing the ex vivo ERG data shown in Figure 2C.
Author contributions:  HOL and ZF contributed to the writing and editing of 
the manuscript. EB contributed to the editing of the manuscript. All authors 
approved the final version of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
Availability of data and materials: All data generated or analyzed during this 
study are included in this published article and its supplementary information 
files.
Open access statement: This is an open access journal, and 
articles are distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
AttributionNonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 License, which allows others 
to remix, tweak, and build upon the work non-commercially, as long as 
appropriate credit is given and the new creations are licensed under the 
identical terms.
Open peer reviewer: Scott M. Taylor, University of West Florida, USA. 
Additional file:  Open peer review report 1. 
References
Ait-Ali N, Fridlich R, Millet-Puel G, Clerin E, Delalande F, Jaillard C, Blond F, Perrocheau 
L, Reichman S, Byrne LC, Olivier-Bandini A, Bellalou J, Moyse E, Bouillaud F, Nicol X, 
Dalkara D, van Dorsselaer A, Sahel JA, Leveillard T (2015) Rod-derived cone viability 
factor promotes cone survival by stimulating aerobic glycolysis. Cell 161:817-832.
Aleman TS, LaVail MM, Montemayor R, Ying G, Maguire MM, Laties AM, Jacobson SG, 
Cideciyan AV (2001) Augmented rod bipolar cell function in partial receptor loss: an 
ERG study in P23H rhodopsin transgenic and aging normal rats. Vision Res 41:2779-
2797.
Angbohang A, Wu N, Charalambous T, Eastlake K, Lei Y , Kim YS, Sun XH, Limb GA (2016) 
Downregulation of the canonical WNT signaling pathway by TGFbeta1 inhibits 
photoreceptor differentiation of adult human Muller glia with stem cell characteristics. 
Stem Cells Dev 25:1-12.
Barhoum R, Martinez-Navarrete G, Corrochano S, Germain F, Fernandez-Sanchez L, de la 
Rosa EJ, de la Villa P , Cuenca N (2008) Functional and structural modifications during 
retinal degeneration in the rd10 mouse. Neuroscience 155:698-713.
Barrett JM, Degenaar P , Sernagor E (2015) Blockade of pathological retinal ganglion cell 
hyperactivity improves optogenetically evoked light responses in rd1 mice. Front Cell 
Neurosci 9:330.
Beier C, Palanker D, Sher A (2018) Stereotyped synaptic connectivity is restored during 
circuit repair in the adult mammalian retina. Curr Biol 28:1818-1824.706   ｜NEURAL REGENERATION RESEARCH ｜Vol 18｜No. 4｜April  2023
NEURAL REGENERATION RESEARCH
www.nrronline.org
 ReviewBeier C, Hovhannisyan A, Weiser S, Kung J, Lee S, Lee DY , Huie P , Dalal R, Palanker 
D, Sher A (2017) Deafferented adult rod bipolar cells create new synapses with 
photoreceptors to restore vision. J Neurosci 37:4635-4644. 
Bonilla-Pons SA, Nakagawa S, Bahima EG, Fernandez-Blanco A, Pesaresi M, D’ Antin JC, 
Sebastian-Perez R, Greco D, Dominguez-Sala E, Gomez-Riera R, Compte RIB, Dierssen 
M, Pulido NM, Cosma MP (2022) Muller glia fused with adult stem cells undergo 
neural differentiation in human retinal models. EBioMedicine 77:103914.
Borowska J, Trenholm S, Awatramani GB (2011) An intrinsic neural oscillator in the 
degenerating mouse retina. J Neurosci 31:5000-5012. 
Bringmann A, Iandiev I, Pannicke T, Wurm A, Hollborn M, Wiedemann P , Osborne NN, 
Reichenbach A (2009) Cellular signaling and factors involved in Muller cell gliosis: 
neuroprotective and detrimental effects. Prog Retin Eye Res 28:423-451. 
Campbell LJ, Hobgood JS, Jia M, Boyd P , Hipp RI, Hyde DR (2021) Notch3 and DeltaB 
maintain Muller glia quiescence and act as negative regulators of regeneration in the 
light-damaged zebrafish retina. Glia 69:546-566.
Care RA, Kastner DB, De la Huerta I, Pan S, Khoche A, Della Santina L, Gamlin C, Santo 
Tomas C, Ngo J, Chen A, Kuo YM, Ou Y , Dunn FA (2019) Partial cone loss triggers 
synapse-specific remodeling and spatial receptive field rearrangements in a mature 
retinal circuit. Cell Rep 27:2171-2183.
Care RA, Anastassov IA, Kastner DB, Kuo YM, Della Santina L, Dunn FA (2020) Mature 
retina compensates functionally for partial loss of rod photoreceptors. Cell Rep 
31:107730.
Castaldi E, Lunghi C, Morrone MC (2020) Neuroplasticity in adult human visual cortex. 
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 112:542-552.
Chen K, Hou B, Zhao Y , Yuan P , Yao D, Chan LLH (2020) Residual contrast response in 
primary visual cortex of rats with inherited retinal degeneration. Vision Res 177:6-11.
Close JL, Gumuscu B, Reh TA (2005) Retinal neurons regulate proliferation of postnatal 
progenitors and Muller glia in the rat retina via TGF beta signaling. Development 
132:3015-3026.
Corredor RG, Goldberg JL (2009) Electrical activity enhances neuronal survival and 
regeneration. J Neural Eng 6:055001.
Cuenca N, Fernandez-Sanchez L, Campello L, Maneu V, De la Villa P , Lax P , Pinilla I 
(2014) Cellular responses following retinal injuries and therapeutic approaches for 
neurodegenerative diseases. Prog Retin Eye Res 43:17-75.
D’Orazi FD, Suzuki SC, Wong RO (2014) Neuronal remodeling in retinal circuit assembly, 
disassembly, and reassembly. Trends Neurosci 37:594-603.
Denlinger B, Helft Z, Telias M, Lorach H, Palanker D, Kramer RH (2020) Local 
photoreceptor degeneration causes local pathophysiological remodeling of retinal 
neurons. JCI Insight 5:e132114.
Di Marco S, Nguyen VA, Bisti S, Protti DA (2009) Permanent functional reorganization of 
retinal circuits induced by early long-term visual deprivation. J Neurosci 29:13691-
13701.
Dong CJ, Agey P , Hare WA (2004) Origins of the electroretinogram oscillatory potentials 
in the rabbit retina. Vis Neurosci 21:533-543. 
Drager UC, Hubel DH (1978) Studies of visual function and its decay in mice with 
hereditary retinal degeneration. J Comp Neurol 180:85-114. 
Fausett BV, Gumerson JD, Goldman D (2008) The proneural basic helix-loop-helix gene 
ascl1a is required for retina regeneration. J Neurosci 28:1109-1117. 
Forbes-Osborne MA, Wilson SG, Morris AC (2013) Insulinoma-associated 1a (Insm1a) is 
required for photoreceptor differentiation in the zebrafish retina. Dev Biol 380:157-
171. 
Fransen JW , Pangeni G, Pyle IS, McCall MA (2015) Functional changes in Tg P23H-1 rat 
retinal responses: differences between ON and OFF pathway transmission to the 
superior colliculus. J Neurophysiol 114:2368-2375.
Fu Z, Kern TS, Hellstrom A, Smith LEH (2021a) Fatty acid oxidation and photoreceptor 
metabolic needs. J Lipid Res 62:100035.
Fu Z, Qiu C, Cagnone G, Tomita Y , Huang S, Cakir B, Kotoda Y , Allen W , Bull E, Akula JD, 
Joyal JS, Hellstrom A, Talukdar S, Smith LEH (2021b) Retinal glial remodeling by FGF21 
preserves retinal function during photoreceptor degeneration. iScience 24:102376.
Gargini C, Terzibasi E, Mazzoni F, Strettoi E (2007) Retinal organization in the retinal 
degeneration 10 (rd10) mutant mouse: a morphological and ERG study. J Comp 
Neurol 500:222-238.
Gehlen J, Esser S, Schaffrath K, Johnen S, Walter P , Muller F (2020) Blockade of retinal 
oscillations by benzodiazepines improves efficiency of electrical stimulation in the 
mouse model of RP , rd10. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 61:37.Goel M, Dhingra NK (2012) Muller glia express rhodopsin in a mouse model of inherited 
retinal degeneration. Neuroscience 225:152-161.
Goel M, Dhingra NK (2021) bFGF and insulin lead to migration of Muller glia to 
photoreceptor layer in rd1 mouse retina. Neurosci Lett 755:135936.
Goldman D (2014) Muller glial cell reprogramming and retina regeneration. Nat Rev 
Neurosci 15:431-442.
Hamon A, Garcia-Garcia D, Ail D, Bitard J, Chesneau A, Dalkara D, Locker M, Roger JE, 
Perron M (2019) Linking YAP to Muller glia quiescence exit in the degenerative retina. 
Cell Rep 27:1712-1725.
Haq W , Arango-Gonzalez B, Zrenner E, Euler T, Schubert T (2014) Synaptic remodeling 
generates synchronous oscillations in the degenerated outer mouse retina. Front 
Neural Circuits 8:108.
Hartong DT, Berson EL, Dryja TP (2006) Retinitis pigmentosa. Lancet 368:1795-1809.
Hayakawa K, Esposito E, Wang X, Terasaki Y , Liu Y , Xing C, Ji X, Lo EH (2016) Transfer of 
mitochondria from astrocytes to neurons after stroke. Nature 535:551-555.
Hoang T, Wang J, Boyd P , Wang F, Santiago C, Jiang L, Yoo S, Lahne M, Todd LJ, Jia M, 
Saez C, Keuthan C, Palazzo I, Squires N, Campbell WA, Rajaii F, Parayil T, Trinh V, Kim 
DW , Wang G, et al. (2020) Gene regulatory networks controlling vertebrate retinal 
regeneration. Science 370:eabb8598.
Iribarne M, Hyde DR, Masai I (2019) TNFalpha induces Muller glia to transition from non-
proliferative gliosis to a regenerative response in mutant zebrafish presenting chronic 
photoreceptor degeneration. Front Cell Dev Biol 7:296.
Iwabe S, Ying GS, Aguirre GD, Beltran WA (2016) Assessment of visual function and 
retinal structure following acute light exposure in the light sensitive T4R rhodopsin 
mutant dog. Exp Eye Res 146:341-353.
Johnson RE, Tien NW , Shen N, Pearson JT, Soto F, Kerschensteiner D (2017) Homeostatic 
plasticity shapes the visual system’s first synapse. Nat Commun 8:1220.
Jones BW , Watt CB, Frederick JM, Baehr W , Chen CK, Levine EM, Milam AH, Lavail MM, 
Marc RE (2003) Retinal remodeling triggered by photoreceptor degenerations. J Comp 
Neurol 464:1-16.
Jones BW , Kondo M, Terasaki H, Watt CB, Rapp K, Anderson J, Lin Y , Shaw MV, Yang JH, 
Marc RE (2011) Retinal remodeling in the Tg P347L rabbit, a large-eye model of retinal 
degeneration. J Comp Neurol 519:2713-2733. 
Kanow MA, Giarmarco MM, Jankowski CS, Tsantilas K, Engel AL, Du J, Linton JD, 
Farnsworth CC, Sloat SR, Rountree A, Sweet IR, Lindsay KJ, Parker ED, Brockerhoff 
SE, Sadilek M, Chao JR, Hurley JB (2017) Biochemical adaptations of the retina and 
retinal pigment epithelium support a metabolic ecosystem in the vertebrate eye. Elife 
6:e28899.
Kaylor JJ, Cook JD, Makshanoff J, Bischoff N, Yong J, Travis GH (2014) Identification of 
the 11-cis-specific retinyl-ester synthase in retinal Muller cells as multifunctional 
O-acyltransferase (MFAT). Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111:7302-7307. 
Kent MR, Kara N, Patton JG (2021) Inhibition of GABAA-rho receptors induces retina 
regeneration in zebrafish. Neural Regen Res 16:367-374. 
Lahne M, Nagashima M, Hyde DR, Hitchcock PF (2020) Reprogramming Muller glia to 
regenerate retinal neurons. Annu Rev Vis Sci 6:171-193.
Lee JY , Care RA, Kastner DB, Della Santina L, Dunn FA (2022) Inhibition, but not excitation, 
recovers from partial cone loss with greater spatiotemporal integration, synapse 
density, and frequency. Cell Rep 38:110317.
Leinonen H, Pham NC, Boyd T, Santoso J, Palczewski K, Vinberg F (2020) Homeostatic 
plasticity in the retina is associated with maintenance of night vision during retinal 
degenerative disease. Elife 9:e59422. 
Leinonen H, Lyon DC, Palczewski K, Foik AT (2022) Visual system hyperexcitability and 
compromised V1 receptive field properties in early-stage retinitis pigmentosa in mice. 
eNeuro 9:ENEURO.0107-22.2022.
Lenkowski JR, Qin Z, Sifuentes CJ, Thummel R, Soto CM, Moens CB, Raymond PA (2013) 
Retinal regeneration in adult zebrafish requires regulation of TGFbeta signaling. Glia 
61:1687-1697.
Lunghi C, Galli-Resta L, Binda P , Cicchini GM, Placidi G, Falsini B, Morrone MC (2019) 
Visual cortical plasticity in retinitis pigmentosa. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 60:2753-
2763.
Machida S, Kondo M, Jamison JA, Khan NW , Kononen LT, Sugawara T, Bush RA, Sieving 
PA (2000) P23H rhodopsin transgenic rat: correlation of retinal function with 
histopathology. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 41:3200-3209.
Marc RE, Jones BW , Anderson JR, Kinard K, Marshak DW , Wilson JH, Wensel T, Lucas 
RJ (2007) Neural reprogramming in retinal degeneration. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 
48:3364-3371.NEURAL REGENERATION RESEARCH ｜Vol 18｜No. 4｜April  2023｜707
NEURAL REGENERATION RESEARCH
www.nrronline.org
 ReviewMontalban-Soler L, Alarcon-Martinez L, Jimenez-Lopez M, Salinas-Navarro M, Galindo-
Romero C, Bezerra de Sa F, Garcia-Ayuso D, Aviles-Trigueros M, Vidal-Sanz M, Agudo-
Barriuso M, Villegas-Perez MP (2012) Retinal compensatory changes after light 
damage in albino mice. Mol Vis 18:675-693.
Nagashima M, D’Cruz TS, Danku AE, Hesse D, Sifuentes C, Raymond PA, Hitchcock PF 
(2020) Midkine-a is required for cell cycle progression of Muller glia during neuronal 
regeneration in the vertebrate retina. J Neurosci 40:1232-1247. 
Nelson CM, Ackerman KM, O’Hayer P , Bailey TJ, Gorsuch RA, Hyde DR (2013) Tumor 
necrosis factor-alpha is produced by dying retinal neurons and is required for Muller 
glia proliferation during zebrafish retinal regeneration. J Neurosci 33:6524-6539. 
Newton F, Megaw R (2020) Mechanisms of photoreceptor death in retinitis pigmentosa. 
Genes (Basel) 11:1120.
Ortega JT, Parmar T, Carmena-Bargueno M, Perez-Sanchez H, Jastrzebska B (2022) 
Flavonoids improve the stability and function of P23H rhodopsin slowing down the 
progression of retinitis pigmentosa in mice. J Neurosci Res 100:1063-1083. 
Penn RD, Hagins WA (1969) Signal transmission along retinal rods and the origin of the 
electroretinographic a-wave. Nature 223:201-204.
Pfeiffer RL, Marc RE, Jones BW (2020) Persistent remodeling and neurodegeneration in 
late-stage retinal degeneration. Prog Retin Eye Res 74:100771.
Pfeiffer RL, Marc RE, Kondo M, Terasaki H, Jones BW (2016) Muller cell metabolic chaos 
during retinal degeneration. Exp Eye Res 150:62-70.
Procyk CA, Allen AE, Martial FP , Lucas RJ (2019) Visual responses in the dorsal lateral 
geniculate nucleus at early stages of retinal degeneration in rd(1) PDE6beta mice. J 
Neurophysiol 122:1753-1764.
Punzo C, Kornacker K, Cepko CL (2009) Stimulation of the insulin/mTOR pathway delays 
cone death in a mouse model of retinitis pigmentosa. Nat Neurosci 12:44-52.
Ramachandran R, Fausett BV, Goldman D (2010) Ascl1a regulates Muller glia 
dedifferentiation and retinal regeneration through a Lin-28-dependent, let-7 
microRNA signalling pathway. Nat Cell Biol 12:1101-1107.
Ramachandran R, Zhao XF, Goldman D (2011) Ascl1a/Dkk/beta-catenin signaling pathway 
is necessary and glycogen synthase kinase-3beta inhibition is sufficient for zebrafish 
retina regeneration. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108:15858-15863.
Ramachandran R, Zhao XF, Goldman D (2012) Insm1a-mediated gene repression is 
essential for the formation and differentiation of Muller glia-derived progenitors in 
the injured retina. Nat Cell Biol 14:1013-1023.
Rao MB, Didiano D, Patton JG (2017) Neurotransmitter-regulated regeneration in the 
zebrafish retina. Stem Cell Reports 8:831-842.
Richards A, Emondi AA, Rohrer B (2006) Long-term ERG analysis in the partially light-
damaged mouse retina reveals regressive and compensatory changes. Vis Neurosci 
23:91-97.
Rowe AA, Patel PD, Gordillo R, Wert KJ (2021) Replenishment of TCA cycle intermediates 
provides photoreceptor resilience against neurodegeneration during progression of 
retinitis pigmentosa. JCI Insight 6:e150898.
Rubin GR, Wen Y , Loop MS, Kraft TW (2022) ERG and behavioral CFF in light-damaged 
albino rats. Int J Mol Sci 23:4127.
Rueda EM, Hall BM, Hill MC, Swinton PG, Tong X, Martin JF, Poche RA (2019) The Hippo 
pathway blocks mammalian retinal Muller glial cell reprogramming. Cell Rep 27:1637-
1649.
Salman A, McClements ME, MacLaren RE (2021) Insights on the regeneration potential 
of Muller glia in the mammalian retina. Cells 10:1957.
Saszik SM, Robson JG, Frishman LJ (2002) The scotopic threshold response of the dark-
adapted electroretinogram of the mouse. J Physiol 543:899-916. 
Sekirnjak C, Jepson LH, Hottowy P , Sher A, Dabrowski W , Litke AM, Chichilnisky EJ (2011) 
Changes in physiological properties of rat ganglion cells during retinal degeneration. J 
Neurophysiol 105:2560-2571.
Sekirnjak C, Hulse C, Jepson LH, Hottowy P , Sher A, Dabrowski W , Litke AM, Chichilnisky 
EJ (2009) Loss of responses to visual but not electrical stimulation in ganglion cells of 
rats with severe photoreceptor degeneration. J Neurophysiol 102:3260-3269.
Shen N, Wang B, Soto F, Kerschensteiner D (2020) Homeostatic plasticity shapes the 
retinal response to photoreceptor degeneration. Curr Biol 30:1916-1926.
Shen W , Lee SR, Mathai AE, Zhang R, Du J, Yam MX, Pye V, Barnett NL, Rayner CL, Zhu 
L, Hurley JB, Seth P , Hirabayashi Y , Furuya S, Gillies MC (2021) Effect of selectively 
knocking down key metabolic genes in Muller glia on photoreceptor health. Glia 
69:1966-1986.
Sher A, Jones BW , Huie P , Paulus YM, Lavinsky D, Leung LS, Nomoto H, Beier C, Marc 
RE, Palanker D (2013) Restoration of retinal structure and function after selective 
photocoagulation. J Neurosci 33:6800-6808.Stockton RA, Slaughter MM (1989) B-wave of the electroretinogram. A reflection of ON 
bipolar cell activity. J Gen Physiol 93:101-122.
Strettoi E, Pignatelli V (2000) Modifications of retinal neurons in a mouse model of 
retinitis pigmentosa. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97:11020-11025.
Strettoi E, Volpini M (2002) Retinal organization in the bcl-2-overexpressing transgenic 
mouse. J Comp Neurol 446:1-10.
Strettoi E, Mears AJ, Swaroop A (2004) Recruitment of the rod pathway by cones in the 
absence of rods. J Neurosci 24:7576-7582.
Strettoi E, Di Marco B, Orsini N, Napoli D (2022) Retinal plasticity. Int J Mol Sci 23:1138.
Strettoi E, Porciatti V, Falsini B, Pignatelli V, Rossi C (2002) Morphological and functional 
abnormalities in the inner retina of the rd/rd mouse. J Neurosci 22:5492-5504.
Telias M, Denlinger B, Helft Z, Thornton C, Beckwith-Cohen B, Kramer RH (2019) Retinoic 
acid induces hyperactivity, and blocking its receptor unmasks light responses and 
augments vision in retinal degeneration. Neuron 102:574-586.
Telias M, Sit KK, Frozenfar D, Smith B, Misra A, Goard MJ, Kramer RH (2022) Retinoic 
acid inhibitors mitigate vision loss in a mouse model of retinal degeneration. Sci Adv 
8:eabm4643.
Thompson S, Blodi FR, Lee S, Welder CR, Mullins RF, Tucker BA, Stasheff SF, Stone EM 
(2014) Photoreceptor cells with profound structural deficits can support useful vision 
in mice. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 55:1859-1866.
Tian N, Copenhagen DR (2001) Visual deprivation alters development of synaptic 
function in inner retina after eye opening. Neuron 32:439-449.
Tian N, Copenhagen DR (2003) Visual stimulation is required for refinement of ON and 
OFF pathways in postnatal retina. Neuron 39:85-96.
Tien NW , Soto F, Kerschensteiner D (2017) Homeostatic plasticity shapes cell-type-
specific wiring in the retina. Neuron 94:656-665.
Todd L, Volkov LI, Zelinka C, Squires N, Fischer AJ (2015) Heparin-binding EGF-like growth 
factor (HB-EGF) stimulates the proliferation of Muller glia-derived progenitor cells in 
avian and murine retinas. Mol Cell Neurosci 69:54-64.
Tomita Y , Qiu C, Bull E, Allen W , Kotoda Y , Talukdar S, Smith LEH, Fu Z (2021) Muller glial 
responses compensate for degenerating photoreceptors in retinitis pigmentosa. Exp 
Mol Med 53:1748-1758.
Toychiev AH, Ivanova E, Yee CW , Sagdullaev BT (2013) Block of gap junctions eliminates 
aberrant activity and restores light responses during retinal degeneration. J Neurosci 
33:13972-13977.
Trenholm S, Borowska J, Zhang J, Hoggarth A, Johnson K, Barnes S, Lewis TJ, Awatramani 
GB (2012) Intrinsic oscillatory activity arising within the electrically coupled AII 
amacrine-ON cone bipolar cell network is driven by voltage-gated Na+ channels. J 
Physiol 590:2501-2517.
Ueki Y , Reh TA (2013) EGF stimulates Muller glial proliferation via a BMP-dependent 
mechanism. Glia 61:778-789.
Ueki Y , Wilken MS, Cox KE, Chipman L, Jorstad N, Sternhagen K, Simic M, Ullom K, 
Nakafuku M, Reh TA (2015) Transgenic expression of the proneural transcription factor 
Ascl1 in Muller glia stimulates retinal regeneration in young mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U 
S A 112:13717-13722.
Vecino E, Rodriguez FD, Ruzafa N, Pereiro X, Sharma SC (2016) Glia-neuron interactions in 
the mammalian retina. Prog Retin Eye Res 51:1-40. 
Wan J, Ramachandran R, Goldman D (2012) HB-EGF is necessary and sufficient for Muller 
glia dedifferentiation and retina regeneration. Dev Cell 22:334-347.
Wan J, Zhao XF, Vojtek A, Goldman D (2014) Retinal injury, growth factors, and cytokines 
converge on beta-catenin and pStat3 signaling to stimulate retina regeneration. Cell 
Rep 9:285-297.
Wang T, Pahlberg J, Cafaro J, Frederiksen R, Cooper AJ, Sampath AP , Field GD, Chen J (2019) 
Activation of rod input in a model of retinal degeneration reverses retinal remodeling 
and induces formation of functional synapses and recovery of visual signaling in the 
adult retina. J Neurosci 39:6798-6810.
Yang P , Cao Q, Liu Y , Wang K, Zhu W (2022) Small-molecule-driven direct reprogramming 
of Muller cells into bipolar-like cells. Cell Prolif 55:e13184.
Yao K, Qiu S, Wang YV, Park SJH, Mohns EJ, Mehta B, Liu X, Chang B, Zenisek D, Crair 
MC, Demb JB, Chen B (2018) Restoration of vision after de novo genesis of rod 
photoreceptors in mammalian retinas. Nature 560:484-488.
Yu WQ, Grzywacz NM, Lee EJ, Field GD (2017) Cell type-specific changes in retinal 
ganglion cell function induced by rod death and cone reorganization in rats. J 
Neurophysiol 118:434-454.
 
P-Reviewer: Taylor SM; C-Editors: Zhao M, Zhao LJ, Qiu Y; T-Editor: Jia Y