44
©Copyright 2023by Turkish Ophthalmological Association
Turkish Journal of Ophthalmology, published by Galenos Publishing House.Invited Review
DOI: 10.4274/tjo.galenos.2022.76436
Turk J Ophthalmol 2023;53:44-57
Avascular Peripheral Retina in Infants
 Şengül Özdek*,  Ece Özdemir Zeydanlı**,  Caroline Baumal***,  Sandra Hoyek****, 
 Nimesh Patel****,  Audina Berrocal*****,  Ashley Lopez-Cañizares*****, 
 Hasenin Al-Khersan*****,  Shunji Kusaka******,  Fukutaro Mano******, 
 Subhadra Jalali*******,  Domenico Lepore********,  Solmaz Akar*********
*Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Ophthalmology, Ankara, Türkiye 
**Ankara Retina Clinic, Ankara, Türkiye 
***Tufts University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Ophthalmology, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, United States of America
****Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Department of Ophthalmology, Boston, United States of America 
*****University of Miami Miller Faculty of Medicine, Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Miami, United States of America 
****** Kindai University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Ophthalmology, Osaka, Japan 
*******L V Prasad Eye Institute, Anant Bajaj Retina Institute and Child Sight Institute, Hyderabad, India
********Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Department of Geriatrics and Neuroscience, A. Gemelli Foundation IRCSS, Rome, Italy
*********Acıbadem Bakırkoy Hospital, Clinic of Ophthalmology, İstanbul, Türkiye
Abstract
Avascular peripheral retina in an infant is a common characteristic of numerous pediatric retinal vascular disorders and often presents 
a diagnostic challenge to the clinician. In this review, key features of each disease in the differential diagnosis, from retinopathy of 
prematurity, familial exudative vitreoretinopathy, Coats disease, incontinentia pigmenti, Norrie disease, and persistent fetal vasculature, 
to other rare hematologic conditions and telomere disorders, will be discussed by expert ophthalmologists in the field.
Keywords: Avascular retina, retinopathy of prematurity, familial exudative vitreoretinopathy, Coats disease, incontinentia pigmenti, 
persistent fetal vasculature, Norrie disease
Cite this article as: Özdek Ş, Özdemir Zeydanlı E, Baumal C, Hoyek S, Patel N, Berrocal A, Lopez-Cañizares A, Al-Khersan H, Kusaka S, Mano F , Jalali S,  
Lepore D, Akar S. Avascular Peripheral Retina in Infants. Turk J Ophthalmol 2023;53:44-57Address for Correspondence: Şengül Özdek, Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Ophthalmology, Ankara, Türkiye 
E-mail: sengulozdek@gmail.com ORCID-ID: orcid.org/0000-0002-7494-4106
Received: 08.11.2022 Accepted: 30.11.202245Özdek et al. Avascular Peripheral Retina in Infants 
Introduction
Pediatric retinal vascular diseases are the leading causes of 
childhood blindness throughout the world.1 Therefore, correct 
and timely diagnosis of an infant presenting with a retinal 
vascular disease is of paramount importance. However, this can 
often be challenging. 
Avascular peripheral retina is a common feature of many 
pediatric retinal vascular diseases. Therefore, the clinician should 
seek out key features that will help differentiate the various 
diseases that may present in such a manner. Clinical evaluation 
should begin with a detailed medical history, including 
gestational age, weight, birth history, neonatal course, and the 
presence of any systemic findings. Family history, including 
known ocular disease in the immediate family or close relatives 
and the presence of parental consanguinity should be questioned. 
A comprehensive ophthalmological examination should then be 
performed. Also, examination of available family members often 
provides important clues for an accurate diagnosis. 
In this article, experienced ophthalmologists in the field will 
review key points of diseases included in the differential diagnosis 
of a pediatric patient presenting with avascular peripheral 
retina. The major differential diagnosis includes retinopathy 
of prematurity (ROP), familial exudative vitreoretinopathy 
(FEVR), Coats’ disease, incontinentia pigmenti (IP), Norrie 
disease, and persistent fetal vasculature (PFV). In addition, other 
rare conditions that may present with avascular peripheral retina, 
such as hematologic and inflammatory conditions and telomere 
disorders, will also be discussed.
Retinopathy of Prematurity (ROP)
The studies of basic mechanisms of the development of the 
normal retinal vascular network dates back to Michaelson2 in 
1948 and later to Flower et al.3 who, using ink-injected flat 
mounted kitten retinas, observed the presence of large portions 
of peripheral non-vascularized retina at birth. The seminal 
studies of Michaelson2, Flower et al.,3 Smith4, and Chan-Ling5 
have contributed to defining the mechanisms underlying the 
development of the vascular network, including vasculogenesis 
of the posterior areas surrounding the papilla, angiogenesis of the 
more peripheral areas, and subsequent progression of the vascular 
network towards the retinal periphery . The formation of the retinal 
vascular network begins between 14 and 15 weeks of gestational 
age with the appearance of a patent superficial capillary plexus 
around the optic disc, and is mediated by angiogenesis. The inner 
vascular plexus develops rapidly and reaches its limits by 32 
weeks, and a small area of avascular retina persists.6 The deeper 
vascular plexus starts forming in the perifoveal zone around 24 
weeks of gestation. Retinal angiogenesis of the deeper plexus 
is centered around the fovea and is driven by the maturation of 
photoreceptors and the consequent increase in metabolic demand. 
The deeper plexus reaches its limits by birth.5 During normal 
development, the retinal vasculature is constantly remodeled 
by increasing capillary density in order to meet the metabolic 
demands of the retina. 
Knowledge of retinal vascular development allows clinicians 
to recognize the features of delayed retinal vascularization (extension, topography, branching vessels, capillary density) after 
premature birth, which characterize the first phase of ROP .4 
Later, the persistent avascular retina stimulates the vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-driven vasoproliferation that 
is the hallmark of the second phase of ROP (Figure 1).4 Laser 
photoablation aims to destroy the avascular retina where the 
VEGF is produced. In contrast, the introduction of anti-VEGF 
drugs for inhibition of vasoproliferation in stage 2 leads to 
abnormal persistence of avascular retina (Figure 2). The persistent 
avascular retina can stimulate reactivation or recurrence of the 
vasoproliferation, as evidenced in studies of preterm infant eyes 
treated with bevacizumab for severe ROP .7 
Persistent peripheral avascular retina, identified as “PAR” in 
the new third edition of the International Classification of ROP ,8 
can correlate with the severity of ROP in the acute phase and 
with the risk of reactivation and recurrence of ROP after either 
photoablation (skip areas) or anti-VEGF injection. 
Furthermore, persistent avascular retina can be observed 
after the acute phase in spontaneously regressed ROP or even 
in former premature infants without ROP or any pathologic 
consequences (Figure 3). This observation opens the way to the 
possibility that the persistence of areas of peripheral avascular 
Figure 1. Color fundus image and corresponding fluorescein angiography of an 
avascular peripheral retina at 35 weeks of postmenstrual age in a preterm infant 
born at 27 weeks of gestational age with a birth weight of 890 grams (Courtesy 
Dr. Domenico Lepore) 
Figure 2. Fluorescein angiography showing an avascular peripheral retina in a 
2-year-old child born preterm (25 weeks of gestational age, birth weight 650 g) and 
treated with 0.2 mg/0.02 mL of ranibizumab at 34 weeks of postmenstrual age for 
type 1 retinopathy of prematurity (Courtesy of Dr. Domenico Lepore)Turk J Ophthalmol 53; 1: 202346retina is not necessarily a potentially pathogenic condition 
but rather a metabolically well-tolerated vascular anomaly . 
Further studies are needed to better understand the features that 
characterize this anomaly .
Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy
Bilateral peripheral avascular retina with associated vitreous 
changes is the hallmark of the rare congenital blinding retinal 
disorder called FEVR.9,10 The genetic abnormality manifests 
as arrested retinal angiogenesis, often in the last trimester 
of pregnancy, that remains so for the lifetime (Figure 4, 
5). The avascular retina triggers a wide array of phenotypic 
variations, with each component having variable severity .9 
These include retinal neovascularization, exudation, retinal 
folds, and subsequent vitreous hemorrhage, retinal detachment 
(RD) causing leukocoria, progression to iris neovascularization, 
neovascular glaucoma, secondary retinoschisis, macular 
heterotropia, and vasoproliferative tumor-like peripheral retinal 
lesions. Also, vitreous condensation at the edge of the arrested 
angiogenesis (Figure 5), epiretinal membranes, vitreoschisis, 
vitreomacular traction manifest variably alongside the retinal 
vascular pathology .
Clinical Diagnosis: Males and females are both affected. 
Symptoms include squint, eye poking, poor vision, leukocoria, 
low vision, rapid onset of visual loss, or rapid development of 
a cataract or glaucoma in newborns, young children, or young 
adults. In some patients who are asymptomatic, lesions are 
noticed during routine retinal examination in eyes with myopia, 
family screening, or in examination of the fellow eyes of RD 
or neovascular glaucoma of unknown cause. The more severe 
phenotypes present soon after birth with associated retinal 
dysplasia.9 The clinical diagnosis of FEVR can be made in a full-
term child in the presence of peripheral retinal avascularity with 
minimal vitreous condensation at the edge. These signs may be 
present in one or both eyes and may or may not be associated 
with additional retinal changes at the time of diagnosis (Figure 
4). However, the association of posterior hyaloid yellow deposits 
seen in some of these eyes is unique to FEVR (Figure 4). In a 
preterm child presenting with similar characteristics but a disease 
tempo not consistent with ROP , the diagnosis of FEVR can be 
made.9,10,11 John et al.11 described ROPER (ROP vs FEVR) in 
premature babies who display retinal abnormalities more typical 
of FEVR than ROP , largely based on fluorescein angiography 
(FA) characteristics and disease course. The distinctive FA 
findings of ROPER include irregular vascular sprouting at the 
vascular-avascular junction (vs the more uniform advancing front 
of ROP), distinct vessel pruning, punctate hyperfluorescence, 
and segmental areas of vascular leakage. The diagnosis of 
ROPER may have implications for management because, like 
FEVR, these patients may manifest a more unpredictable and 
long-term course than those with ROP . Another clue is that 
vascularization does not show any forward movement into the 
avascular retina at any time point in FEVR. This is useful in 
differentiating from ROP , where the initial avascular retina 
always shows advancement of vascularization to a varying degree Figure 3. Fluorescein angiography of an avascular peripheral retina in a 2-year-old 
child who was born preterm (28 weeks of gestational age, birth weight 980 g) and 
had fully regressed stage 2 zone 2 retinopathy of prematurity diagnosed at 32 weeks 
(Courtesy of Dr. Domenico Lepore)
Figure 4. Avascular peripheral retina with neovascularization (NV) and typical 
posterior hyaloid yellow deposits in a term neonate with familial exudative 
vitreoretinopathy . Corresponding fluorescein angiography shows straightening of 
the vessels towards the periphery, avascular peripheral retina, and severe leakage 
from the NV at the vascular-avascular retinal junction (Courtesy of Dr. Şengül 
Özdek) 
Figure 5. Fundus photo of a female patient aged 20 years. Peripheral avascular 
retina in familial exudative vitreoretinopathy never shows forward advancement 
during the lifetime, has fine but adherent vitreous condensation at the edge, and 
often the temporal raphe is involved more posteriorly, like a ‘notch’. Avascularity 
is present in all quadrants but is more prominent temporally . There are no ghost 
vessels (Courtesy of Dr. Subhadra Jalali)
47Özdek et al. Avascular Peripheral Retina in Infants 
in the first few weeks and months of follow-up. Occluded/
ghost vessels are hence not seen in the avascular part of the 
retina (Figure 4, 5). Similarly, chorioretinal scarring is typically 
absent in FEVR and helps to differentiate from other mimickers 
like vasculitis or viral retinitis. Eyes with bilaterally advanced 
disease have bilateral leukocoria due to retrolental fibroblastic 
proliferation and RD, which is not different from ROP . However, 
the exudative component is often more significant in FEVR than 
that seen in ROP .
Family Involvement: Being a hereditary retinopathy, family 
evaluation may reveal autosomal dominant inheritance, which is 
the most common, although X-linked and recessive inheritance 
patterns are also seen, with variable penetrance.9,10,12 Family 
members can present with varying degrees of retinal problems 
and should always be examined in detail.9 Probands with 
severe phenotypes present with RD at birth or in early infancy, 
resulting in bilateral blindness. They are more likely to have a 
mutation in the Norrie disease pseudoglioma (NDP) gene, which 
was previously classified as Norrie disease. However, it is now 
established that FEVR and Norrie are similar conditions that 
belong to the same spectrum of defective Wnt signal pathway 
mutations.9,10,12 The next pregnancy may have similar mutations, 
and thus the baby may be born blind with congenital RD or 
develop RD very soon after birth. Early delivery and evaluation 
within a day or two after birth can be done to diagnose and treat 
the retinopathy as early as possible. Systemic associations are 
seen in some patients, so a thorough systemic evaluation should 
be performed by a neonatologist or pediatrician. Common 
systemic associations include hearing loss, cognitive deficits, 
impaired osteogenesis, muscle hypotony, microcephaly, and 
rarely hematological abnormalities.
Disease Classification: The severity of disease is currently 
described through various stages as classified by Pendergast 
and Trese13 in 1998 (Table 1). With the evolution of widefield 
fundus FA, new insights into FEVR have emerged that led to a 
new classification by Kashani et al.14 in 2014 (Table 2).
Investigations: Regular follow-up and documentation of 
retinal changes is essential to know the tempo of the disease 
and its progression, which can vary at various phases of 
life. Widefield fundus photography to visualize peripheral 
retinal changes is strongly recommended at presentation and 
at annual follow-ups, along with widefield FA as much as 
possible. Widefield optical coherence tomography (OCT) also 
provides insights into vitreoretinal adhesions, traction, shallow 
RD, retinoschisis, macular edema, or macular hole and helps 
guide surgical decisions. Fundus photographs/FA of the family 
members are also recommended whenever feasible. Genetic 
testing for mutations is highly desirable in the diagnosis and 
management of the patient and the family .
Disease Course: FEVR stages do not always progress 
from one to the next, but are rather phenotypes with variable 
presentations. Each presentation has its own natural course that 
can vary from no change to relentless, progressive worsening 
or disease reactivation after a long period of quiescence. Eyes 
with exudation usually have worse prognosis. RD can be seen in 21-64% of cases in FEVR and is the most common indication 
for surgical intervention.13 It may be tractional, rhegmatogenous, 
exudative, or combined. When left untreated, eyes with early-
onset FEVR with or without retinal dysplasia often develop 
progressive shallowing of the anterior chamber, corneo-lenticular 
adhesions, and ultimately corneal scarring with associated 
glaucoma or eventual phthisis bulbi. Infants at this stage often 
develop an oculodigital reflex that is very robust and difficult 
to stop.
Management: Early stages are managed by laser 
photocoagulation of the avascular retina, although this can 
sometimes lead to adverse events like epiretinal membranes, 
tractional detachments, and retinal tears, or have no effect 
on the relentless progressive exudation. Advanced cases need 
additional vitrectomy with or without buckling procedures for 
treatment and also as prophylaxis against further progression. 
Early vitrectomy can also be done as prophylaxis in selected 
cases where laser ablation has the potential to cause problems 
or is likely to be ineffective. Early-onset severe FEVR with or Table 1. Staging of familial exudative vitreoretinopathy 
(FEVR) by Pendergast and Trese13
Stage Features
1 Peripheral avascular retina*
2A: Retinal neovascularization without exudates
B: Retinal neovascularization with exudates
3A: Extramacular retinal detachment without exudates
B: Extramacular retinal detachment with exudates
4 A: Macula involving subtotal retinal detachment without exudates
B: Macula involving subtotal retinal detachment with exudates
5 Total retinal detachment
*Peripheral avascular retina in FEVR is almost always associated with fine but adherent 
vitreous condensation at the edge of vascularized retina; often the temporal raphe is involved 
more posteriorly like a ‘notch’, allowing differentiation from other conditions associated with 
avascular peripheral retinal pathologies.
Table 2. Revised familial exudative vitreoretinopathy 
staging using additional fluorescein angiography by 
Kashani et al.14
Stage Features
1Avascular periphery or anomalous intraretinal vascularization
1A. Without exudate or leakage
1B. With exudate or leakage
2Avascular retinal periphery with extraretinal vascularization
2A. Without exudates or leakage
2B. With exudates or leakage
3Extramacular retinal detachment
3A. Without exudates or leakage
3B. With exudates or leakage
4 Macula involving subtotal retinal detachment
4A. Without exudates or leakage
4B. With exudates or leakage
5Total retinal detachment
5A. Open funnel
5B. Closed FunnelTurk J Ophthalmol 53; 1: 202348without retinal dysplasia is managed by surgery; however, the 
results suggest that it provides only minimal ambulatory vision 
in a few cases.13,15
To summarize, the often familial, congenital, bilateral 
peripheral avascular retina in FEVR has unique characteristics 
of vitreous condensation at the edges, absence of ghost vessels, 
lifetime of arrested angiogenesis, and varying phenotypes with 
or without exudation and with variable potential for progression.
Coats’ Disease
Coats’ disease is a nonhereditary disorder characterized by 
the formation of abnormal retinal vessels that cause intra- and 
subretinal exudative changes. It mainly affects boys around the 
age of 5 years and is unilateral, but rarely affects girls or presents 
bilaterally .16,17 The disease may be detected with minor vision 
loss or visual field abnormalities at school health checkups, 
while it is often in an advanced stage when the disease is 
detected early in childhood with white or yellowish pupils and/
or strabismus. Coats’ disease is progressive, and if not treated 
appropriately, RD and neovascular glaucoma may develop, 
ultimately necessitating enucleation of the eye. According to the 
staging classification proposed by Shields et al.16 in 2001, the 
disease is classified into stage 1 with retinal vascular aneurysmal 
formation without exudative changes, stage 2 with exudative 
changes, stage 3A with partial RD, stage 3B with total RD, 
stage 4 with neovascular glaucoma, and stage 5 with phthisis 
bulbi. Because retinal vascular abnormality mainly occurs in the 
periphery, widefield color fundus photography and fluorescence 
angiography are extremely useful. In the following paragraphs, 
we focus on the differential diagnoses of Coats’ disease from 
retinoblastoma, ROP , FEVR, PFV , and Norrie disease in regards 
to the peripheral avascular retina.
Coats’ disease has been characterized by usually unilateral 
peripheral retinal telangiectasias and light bulb-shaped 
microaneurysms surrounded by capillary non-perfusion areas. 
However, some advocate that Coats’ disease may actually be 
bilateral because of the presence of peripheral vascular changes in 
the fellow eyes.18 The most crucial differential of Coats’ disease 
is retinoblastoma, which is life-threatening if misdiagnosed. 
Advanced Coats’ disease with a bullous RD can present with 
a yellowish pupillary reflex (xanthocoria) rather than white 
as cholesterol crystals accumulate in the subretinal space. In 
addition, retinal telangiectasia can be seen on the surface of the 
detached retina in Coats’ disease (Figure 6). On the contrary, in 
retinoblastoma a whitish-gray pupillary reflex can be seen, and 
retinal telangiectasia is uncommon. 
Unlike ROP , a vascular-avascular junction is rarely seen 
in Coats’ disease. However, aggressive ROP or zone 1 with 
plus disease with exudative changes can masquerade as Coats’ 
disease (Figure 7). The bulb-shaped peripheral vascular changes 
in Coats’ disease should be pivotal components to differentiate 
those conditions. RD in Coats’ disease is typically exudative, but 
can sometimes be rhegmatogenous or tractional. Coats’ disease 
with tractional RD may present with fibrovascular membrane, 
which needs to be differentiated from FEVR or Norrie disease (Figure 8). A dragged disc and macula suggest FEVR, while 
subretinal exudation and bulb-shaped retinal telangiectasias 
suggest Coats’ disease (Figure 9). Genetic identification of 
causative FEVR genes (i.e., FZD4, NDP , LRP5, and TSPAN12) 
and bilateral conditions would support the diagnosis of FEVR. 
Basically, the fibrovascular membrane is seen posteriorly in 
Coats’ disease if present, but is located temporally in FEVR. PFV 
also could be a differential diagnosis of Coats’ disease. However, 
the fibrovascular membrane is usually located retrolentally and 
more to the nasal side in PFV , which does not present with bulb-
shaped retinal telangiectasias.
Management: In the early stages, careful observation or 
photocoagulation of the vascular aneurysms is the mainstay 
of treatment. In cases with a progressive RD refractory to 
ablative treatment (stage 3 or higher), surgical treatment is 
often required. The main surgical procedures include vitrectomy Figure 6. Yellowish pupillary reflex in Coats’ disease. A bulbed-shaped retinal 
telangiectasia (white arrow) overlying the bullous retinal detachment suggests 
a diagnosis of Coats’ disease rather than retinoblastoma (Courtesy of Dr. Shunji 
Kusaka)
Figure 7. A case of retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) with exudative changes. A 
falciform retinal detachment with subretinal exudation in a patient with stage 5A 
ROP mimics Coats’ disease (Courtesy of Dr. Shunji Kusaka)
49Özdek et al. Avascular Peripheral Retina in Infants 
and drainage of subretinal fluid.19,20 As intraocular VEGF 
concentrations are known to be extremely high in Coats’ 
disease,21 a procedure to drain the large amount of VEGF present 
in the subretinal space from the eye is a logical approach.22 
Other methodological approaches include a non-vitrectomized 
technique with transscleral drainage and laser photocoagulation23 or combined scleral buckling surgery .24 Although the advent of 
anti-VEGF agents has given us various treatment options for 
Coats’ disease, the visual prognosis is still poor in patients with 
advanced Coats’ disease.17 It is important to recognize that Coats’ 
disease is progressive, and continuous examinations are needed to 
determine the appropriate indication for treatments.
Incontinentia Pigmenti
IP , also referred to as Bloch-Sulzberger syndrome, is a rare 
hereditary condition characterized by generalized abnormality of 
the ectodermal tissues and varying degrees of abnormality of the 
retina and central nervous system. IP typically has a bilateral but 
asymmetric presentation and particularly affects the skin, eyes, 
brain, and teeth. Its incidence is estimated to be 0.7 cases per 
100,000 live births.25,26,27,28,29,30
IP is inherited as an X-linked dominant trait caused by 
a mutation in the NEMO gene (essential modulator gene), 
located at gene locus Xq28.25,26,27,28,29,30 The resulting protein 
regulates the activity of NF-kB, making cells more susceptible to 
apoptotic signals and leading to increased endothelial cell death. 
Some infrequent cases also involve a translocation at Xp11. Only 
women inherit the disease, as it is lethal in males. However, 
sporadic cases have also been reported in males, most probably a 
result of de novo mutations. 25,26,27,28,29,30
Initial symptoms of this disease are skin blisters observed in 
infants soon after birth. 25,26,27 The stages of IP progression are 
as follows:
Stage 1 is called vesicular or vesicular-bullous. It is 
characterized by linear inflammatory bubbles and vesicles which 
appear during the first two months after birth, with relative 
sparing of the face. This stage can last from weeks to months. 
Stage 2 is called verrucous. During this stage, linear 
hyperkeratotic papules develop on the distal limbs and scalp and 
last for varying durations. 
Stage 3 is the hyperpigmentation stage. It occurs with 
the onset of linear hyperpigmented streaks starting in infancy 
(Figure 10) and gradually disappearing during adulthood.
Stage 4 is the final stage and characterized by hypopigmented 
macules and hairless patches. Skin biopsies of these patients show 
dyskeratosis, acanthosis, pigment incontinence and eosinophil 
infiltration.25,26,27
Extracutaneous manifestations are common, observed in up 
to 80% of IP cases. These can include:25,26,27,30,31,32 
• Eye abnormalities (retinal and corneal abnormalities, 
microphthalmia, cataract, iris hypoplasia, uveitis, nystagmus, 
strabismus), which are reported in up to 77% of IP cases.
• Dental abnormalities (delayed eruption, malformed 
teeth, hypodontia, anodontia, delayed dentition), which are 
present in up to 80% of cases.
• Nail abnormalities (mild nail dystrophy, ridging, or 
disruption).
•  Hair involvement (alopecia and baldness).
• Central nervous system involvement (convulsions, 
seizures, mental retardation, ischemic strokes, hydrocephalus). 
Approximately 30% of IP patients have neurologic impairment. Figure 8. Intra-operative view of Coats’ disease with fibrovascular membrane. A 
fibrovascular membrane was localized posteriorly in a patient with Coats’ disease 
(A). After the removal of fibrovascular membrane, bulb-shaped telangiectasias 
(white arrows) and subretinal exudates became prominent under perfluorocarbon 
liquid (B) (Courtesy of Dr. Shunji Kusaka)
Figure 9. A case of Coats’ disease with a peripheral avascular retina, mimicking 
familial exudative vitreoretinopathy . Color fundus photograph of Coats’ disease 
shows peripheral vascular proliferations and branched vessels, and exudative changes 
in the posterior pole. Fluorescein angiography of the same case shows peripheral 
avascular retina with bulb-shaped telangiectasias (white arrow), suggesting the 
diagnosis of Coats’ disease (Courtesy of Dr. Şengül Özdek)
Turk J Ophthalmol 53; 1: 202350Affected children can develop hemiplegias, intellectual disability, 
and cerebellar ataxia. These manifestations pose a significant 
threat to the normal life expectancy of IP patients.
• Skeletal abnormalities (syndactyly, cranial deformities, 
dwarfism, supernumerary ribs, hemiatrophy, and short limbs). 
• Breast abnormalities  (hypoplasia, unilateral aplasia, 
supernumerary nipples).
• Immunological changes due to defective neutrophil 
chemotaxis and lymphocyte function. There is also possibility of 
malignancies, such as hematological neoplasms, Wilms’ tumor, 
and retinoblastoma.
Retinal Findings: The hallmark of retinal disease in IP is 
peripheral retinal ischemia leading to neovascularization, vitreous 
hemorrhage, and tractional RD. Tractional RD may progress to a 
closed funnel RD with formation of a retrolental mass, eventually 
leading to phthisis bulbi.26,27,33 Exudative RD may also occur.
Unlike ROP and FEVR, the ischemia does not follow the 
developmental vascular pattern with a clear distinction between 
vascularized retina posteriorly and avascular retina anteriorly . 
Rather, peripheral ischemia is often accompanied by ischemia of 
the posterior vascularized retina. Epiretinal neovascularization may 
develop at this border, which can lead to vitreous hemorrhage, 
contraction, and traction. In some cases, the foveal avascular zone 
may enlarge or become irregular because of progressive capillary loss. Approximately one in four children with IP have tractional 
RDs, with the greatest risk during infancy and childhood.
Another cause of decreased vision in patients with IP is macular 
pathology, including foveal hypoplasia, RPE mottling, cherry red 
spots, increased macular pigmentation, subretinal pigmentary 
changes, epiretinal membrane, macular ischemia, aneurysms, and 
neovascularization of the optic disc. In addition, changes in the 
peripheral retina may progress towards the posterior pole. These 
include peripheral avascular retina, aneurysm-like dilations, 
arteriovenous anastomosis, vascular loops similar to those seen in 
aggressive ROP , retinal and extraretinal new vessels, preretinal 
fibrovascular proliferation, vitreous hemorrhage, RD (tractional 
or exudative), and exudates.27,34,35,36
Less common ocular findings include strabismus, cataracts, 
conjunctival pigmentation, optic atrophy, retinal pigment 
abnormalities, foveal hypoplasia, foveal disorganization, and 
microphthalmia. Reduced vision may also be associated with brain 
disorders leading to cortical blindness.26,34
Disease Staging: The vitreoretinal changes that occur during 
the course of disease can be classified into five stages:
Stage 1 includes retinal pigment epithelial changes.
Stage 2 includes retinal vascular abnormalities (except 
neovascularization).Figure 10. A 2-month-old girl with incontinentia pigmenti and hyperpigmented rash noted on the trunk and lower extremities (A, B). Fundus photograph of the right eye 
shows total tractional retinal detachment with peripheral avascular retina and fibrovascular membranes causing anteroposterior traction in the center (C). Fundus photograph 
of the left eye shows near-normal posterior pole and lasered peripheral avascular areas (D). Fluorescein angiography highlights the abnormal vasculature. The right eye shows 
severe leakage from the fibrovascular membranes and totally avascular periphery (E). The left eye shows leaking pathological vessels at the avascular-vascular junction, posterior 
to the laser scars (F , G). (Courtesy of Dr. Şengül Özdek)
51Özdek et al. Avascular Peripheral Retina in Infants 
Stage 3 includes retinopathy with neovascularization or 
other pathologies secondary to retinal vasculopathy like retinal 
exudation, epiretinal membrane/proliferation and vitreous 
hemorrhage.
Stage 4 includes RD without end-stage changes. Substages 
include 4a (partial RD) and 4b (total RD).
Stage 5 is the end stage, with severe ocular complications 
such as phthisis bulbi and secondary glaucoma.
Investigations:  Recent OCT studies using hand-held 
devices have shown macular abnormalities in IP such as inner 
and outer retinal thinning, cystoid macular edema, blunted 
foveal pit, and irregular outer plexiform layer with inner retinal 
thinning temporal to the fovea.35,36 Ultra-widefield OCT can 
simultaneously demonstrate macular and peripheral vitreoretinal 
changes. OCTA is also an important tool to detect capillary 
nonperfusion and retinal neovascularization.35,36
Management: IP requires a multidisciplinary approach 
due to the involvement of multiple organ systems. Pediatric 
dermatology should be consulted for cutaneous lesions, and 
pediatric neurology for the management of seizures and 
neurologic imaging. Genetic testing may confirm the diagnosis. 
Approximately 25-35% of cases are familial, and the remaining 
are sporadic. Close ophthalmic monitoring is required from birth 
to prevent blindness, given the high risk of progressive peripheral 
retinal nonperfusion and neovascularization. These eyes are at risk 
for life since the onset of retinopathy is variable. As the retinal 
vascular disease may progress rapidly over the first weeks of life, 
monthly examinations from birth to 4 months of age and then every 
3 months until the age of 1 year is recommended. Examinations can 
be performed every 6 months after that if the condition is stable. The 
presence of any ischemia should be carefully monitored since it can be 
potentially progressive and cause neovascularization and subsequent 
detachment.26,27,33 We advise early FA to identify avascular retina 
in IP patients and early and aggressive laser treatment sparing 
the macula to prevent terminal complications.34 RD and vitreous 
hemorrhage may require pars plana vitrectomy .
Prognosis is variable depending on the degree of skin and 
organ involvement. Patients without significant ophthalmic 
or neurological impairment have a good prognosis and normal 
life expectancy .37 Patients with seizures and structural CNS 
abnormalities have the greatest risk of developmental delay and 
impairment.37
Persistent Fetal Vasculature (PFV)
Previously known as persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous, 
PFV is a congenital eye disorder leading to blindness in up to 5% 
of children in the United States.38 This developmental abnormality 
is caused by failed involution of the embryonic hyaloid vasculature 
in utero, resulting a various degrees of congenital posterior pole 
manifestations. First described by Cloquet in 1818, PFV is 
most often unilateral and sporadic. Bilateral presentation may 
be noted in up to 10% of cases and this finding should prompt 
investigation for additional ocular and systemic comorbidities as 
well as an underlying genetic etiology . PFV has a spectrum of anatomic presentations and may be 
classified based on location as anterior, posterior, or combined. 
Anterior PFV is characterized by persistence of part of the 
tunica vasculosa lentis, and this may result in some or all of 
the following findings: retrolental opacity, cataract, elongated 
ciliary process, shallow anterior chamber, and a membranous 
transformation of the anterior vitreous face with secondary 
traction on the peripheral retina in some cases. Posterior 
PFV results from remnants of the hyaloid artery that form a 
fibrovascular stalk extending from the optic nerve into the 
vitreous and up to the retrolental area in some cases (Figure 
11). This may lead to retinal folds, retinal or optic nerve 
dysplasia, traction, and/or focal detachment, as well as retinal or 
vitreous hemorrhage. Intraocular progression of PFV is related to 
continued eye growth inducing tractional changes on the retina, 
lens, and ciliary processes. Additional ocular manifestations of 
both anterior and posterior PFV may include microphthalmia, 
leukocoria, strabismus, amblyopia, corneal opacification, angle-
closure glaucoma, and phthisis bulbi in advanced cases (Table 
3).39
Diagnosis of PFV is usually clinical, and peripheral retinal 
nonperfusion is one of the main retinal findings in posterior 
PFV . Peripheral capillary nonperfusion was first described on FA 
Figure 11. Persistent fetal vasculature in a 6-month-old boy presenting with 
leukocoria and exotropia of the right eye.40 Color fundus photograph of the right 
eye revealed a fibrovascular stalk extending from the optic nerve to the posterior 
lens capsule (A, B, C). Fluorescein angiography of the right eye shows retinal 
vessels in posterior retinal folds pulled anteriorly into the stalk up to the posterior 
lens (a, c), as well as peripheral retinal capillary nonperfusion (b). Reprinted from 
Pictures & Perspectives, 124/4, Jeng-Miller KW , Joseph A, Baumal CR, Fluorescein 
Angiography in Persistent Fetal Vasculature, Page 455, Copyright (2016), with 
permission from ElsevierTurk J Ophthalmol 53; 1: 202352in a report of a 6-month-old boy with unilateral PFV (Figure 
11).40 Recent studies have found retinal vascular abnormalities 
not only in the affected eyes of patients with unilateral PFV but 
also in their funduscopically normal fellow eyes.41,42 The fellow 
eyes had subtle abnormalities that can be revealed through 
FA.42,43 Specifically, peripheral avascularity was reported as the 
most common finding seen in 67% to 90% of the fellow eyes 
of patients with unilateral PFV .41,42 However, these angiographic 
findings are not specific to PFV and can overlap with other 
pediatric retinal vascular conditions, especially FEVR. A recent 
case report described a 13-month-old boy with FEVR presenting 
with a large unilateral fibrovascular stalk mimicking PFV and 
bilateral peripheral retinal avascularity .44 Nonetheless, the vascular 
anomalies are less pronounced in PFV compared to FEVR, thus 
requiring a higher threshold to treat the avascular retina in 
PFV . The underlying mechanisms for the peripheral avascular 
retina and the abnormal vasculature in PFV remain unclear. Of 
note, the exact regulatory mechanisms responsible for PFV are 
still poorly understood. Pathogenic variants in the ATOH7, 
NDP , COX15, ZNF408, and FZD4 genes have been reported 
in bilateral PFV with different patterns of inheritance. It is 
possible these pathogenic variants that lead to the cellular defects 
associated with PFV may also be involved in the development of 
abnormal retinal vasculogenesis and angiogenesis.43 Moreover, 
clinical features that can help differentiate PFV from FEVR 
and other retinal vascular conditions include microphthalmia, 
congenital eye abnormalities, absence of family history, laterality, 
and genetic testing.
Management of PFV includes observation or surgery, 
depending on visual potential and the location, features, and 
severity of the disease. Patient age and visual prognosis as dictated 
by the type of PFV , macular and optic nerve abnormalities, 
severity of microphthalmia, degree of amblyopia, presence of 
central lens opacification, and ability to follow up are factors 
to consider. Observation can be considered in nonprogressive 
disease without visual axis obscuration, as well as in advanced 
or chronic disease with poor visual potential characterized by 
older age at presentation, severe microphthalmia with axial 
length less than 15 mm, axial length asymmetry greater than 
3.5 mm,45 extensive anterior and posterior pole congenital 
anatomic involvement, closed funnel RD, retinal dysplasia, 
and severe optic hypoplasia with a normal contralateral eye. In 
these cases, surgery may not be beneficial and might increase the risk of postoperative complications such as RD with 
progressive phthisis or vitreous hemorrhage. Nevertheless, a 
surgical approach may be an option as without intervention, 
some eyes with PFV may eventually lose all vision due to RD or 
glaucoma (reported range from 27% to 70%).39 Surgery may be 
indicated in cases of significant media opacities from retrolental 
membrane or cataract, shallowing of the anterior chamber, 
uncontrolled glaucoma, ocular hypotony from ciliary process 
traction, vitreous hemorrhage, and RD secondary to vitreoretinal 
traction. The goal is to sever the fibrovascular stalk, allow for 
axial lengthening, alleviate posterior pole and/or ciliary process 
traction, and prevent progression to tractional RD, glaucoma, 
phthisis, and vision loss.46,47 When indicated, early intervention 
should be performed to maximize visual outcome and avoid 
glaucomatous complications.48 
Norrie Disease
Norrie disease is the most severe phenotype in the spectrum 
of NDP-related retinopathies, which are genetically determined 
diseases inherited in an X-linked manner and caused by 
mutations in the Norrin cystine knot growth factor gene, also 
known as the NDP gene.49 Warburg50 extensively studied the 
characteristics of the disease and referred to it as congenital 
progressive oculo-acoustico-cerebral degeneration. The ocular 
presentation is invariably severe, with retinal degeneration 
occurring before or very shortly after birth and typically being 
bilateral.51 Affected patients are male infants owing to its 
X-linked recessive inheritance. Patients often present with 
bilateral leukocoria and no light perception at birth or soon 
after birth.52 Microphthalmia, shallow anterior chamber and 
synechiae, iris atrophy, cataract, and elongated ciliary processes 
are commonly observed. The classic fundus finding is a greyish-
yellow, vascularized, immature retinal cell mass consisting of 
fibrovascular material behind the lens. These dysplastic retinal 
masses have been referred to as “pseudogliomas” due to their 
appearance.52,53,54 The peripheral retina beyond the mass area 
is often totally avascular and usually shows some pigmentary 
changes. As the tissue dysplasia and retrolental fibrovascular 
proliferation progresses, traction on the retina worsens, eventually 
leading to phthisis bulbi and loss of the eye. Treatment strategies 
include early laser photocoagulation and vitrectomy to preserve 
the globe and, if possible, restore some vision, which is usually 
at the level of light perception.52,53
Norrie disease is an important consideration in the 
differential diagnosis of peripheral avascular retina. The disease 
phenotype may show considerable overlap with other NDP-
related retinopathies, including X-linked FEVR, NDP-related 
advanced ROP , some cases of Coats’ disease, and especially severe 
PFV types.47,55,56,57 An important distinction of Norrie disease 
is its predisposition for bilateral and symmetric manifestations. 
Also, RD in Norrie disease is often hemorrhagic and vascular 
lesions are more prominent.52 Another clue is the associated 
systemic findings. Cognitive-psychosocial disturbances have 
been reported at rates of up to 50%.49,58 Sensorineural hearing 
loss, which usually begins in adolescence, was originally reported Table 3. Key features of persistent fetal vasculature
Common Microphthalmia, leukocoria, cataract, strabismus
AnteriorPersistent pupillary membrane, dilated iris vessels, retrolental 
fibrovascular membrane, shallow anterior chamber, elongated 
ciliary process, ectropion uvea, coloboma iridis, peripheral 
tractional retinal detachment, intralenticular hemorrhages, 
angle-closure glaucoma, corneal opacification
PosteriorVitreous membranes and stalk, hypoplastic/dysplastic optic 
nerve, macular pigmentary disruption or hypoplastic macula, 
retinal fold/detachment, retinal or vitreous hemorrhage, 
peripheral avascular retina53Özdek et al. Avascular Peripheral Retina in Infants 
in more than 30% of patients with Norrie disease.50 However, 
more recent studies have suggested that 100% of patients will 
eventually suffer some degree of hearing loss.58,59 Nevertheless, 
the retinal dysplasia that occurs in Norrie disease can 
be clinically indistinguishable from the presentations of 
trisomy, 13 Walker-Warburg syndrome, and severe forms 
of posterior PFV with funnel-shaped RD, and these must be 
distinguished through genetic testing.
Other Diseases Associated with Avascular Peripheral 
Retina
Protein C deficiency is a rare autosomal genetic disease 
caused by a deficiency of the natural anticoagulant protein 
C.60 Protein C is dependent on vitamin K to inactivate specific plasma factors, and subsequently the conversion of prothrombin 
to thrombin.60 The disease is caused by mutations in the Protein 
C, Inactivator of Coagulation Factors Va and VIIIa (PROC) gene 
and predisposes people to fatal thromboembolic attacks and 
various ophthalmic manifestations.60 Common ocular findings 
reported in association with this disorder include anterior 
and posterior segment dysgenesis, leukocoria, microphthalmia, 
cataract, anomalous retinal vascular branching, amaurosis 
fugax, retinal hemorrhages, central retinal vein occlusion and 
artery occlusion, RD, peripheral retinal avascularity, and retinal 
neovascularization.60,61 FA has revealed leakage at the junction of 
the vascular and avascular retina.61 In homozygous individuals, 
ocular findings can present unilaterally or bilaterally at infancy, 
Figure 12. A 40-day-old girl with Adams-Oliver syndrome presenting with tractional retinal detachment in both eyes (A, B). Fundoscopic examination of the right eye 
revealed extensive fibrosis involving the optic nerve and the posterior pole (A). The left eye showed a radial falciform retinal fold extending from the macula to temporal 
periphery (B). Fluorescein angiography of the right eye showed dilated leaking vessels at the center and abrupt termination of the vascularization with bulb-shaped ends in 
the midperiphery (C). The left eye showed tortuous vessels and capillary nonperfusion areas. There was an abrupt termination of vascularization at the temporal macula and 
straightening of vessels, as well as posterior leakage (D). The patient underwent lens-sparing vitrectomy with membrane peeling and endolaser in both eyes, which resulted 
in retinal attachment (E, F). Genetic testing revealed homozygous mutation in the DOCK6 gene. (Courtesy of Dr. Şengül Özdek)Turk J Ophthalmol 53; 1: 202354and the first ophthalmic manifestations include leukocoria and 
RDs.60,61 Severe vital organ complications may be preventable 
if treated promptly . Therefore, early diagnosis is essential, as 
it can save the patient’s life and vision. Treatment focuses on 
exogenous protein C administration and symptom management. 
Ophthalmic treatment includes laser photocoagulation for 
peripheral avascular retina and intravitreal anti-VEGF for 
neovascularization.61,62
Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS) is a rare inherited disorder 
characterized by aplasia cutis and limb defects.63 Patients may 
present with neurological, heart, skin, and eye involvement.63 The 
disease is caused by mutations in ARHGAP31, DLL4, DOCK6, 
EOGT, NOTCH1, or RBPJ.64 The symptoms depend on which 
gene is involved, and mutations in these genes are only found in 
approximately 50% of patients.64 Mutations in the Rho GTPase 
Activating Protein 31 (ARHGAP31) or Dedicator of cytokinesis 
6 (DOCK6) genes involve dysfunctional Cdc42/Rac1 signaling, 
a pathway that is critical for angiogenesis.65 The abnormalities 
are thought to result from genetically decreased stability of the 
blood vessels, which affects perfusion and results in ischemia.65 
Ocular defects include microphthalmia, microcornea, congenital 
vasculopathy, ischemic-proliferative retinopathy, rubeosis 
iridis, peripheral avascular retina with gliosis, and intravitreal 
neovascularization.63,66 Patients may present with limbs that 
are short or completely missing.63,66 Ophthalmic examination 
and fundoscopy in children with AOS are warranted. In some 
patients, the retinal findings have been reported to mimic those 
of infants with ROP , FEVR, or Norrie disease (Figure 12).66 
Therefore, suspicion of AOS should prompt ophthalmologic 
evaluation, including FA, to detect and possibly treat the ischemic 
retinopathy . There is no cure for AOS. Treatment focuses on 
symptom management and includes skin grafting, surgery to 
repair skin lesions and skull abnormalities, prostheses for limb 
malformations, laser photocoagulation to the avascular retina to 
arrest the potential evolution from ischemia to neovascularization, 
and intravitreal anti-VEGF for neovascularization.62,66
Revesz syndrome, a rare type of dyskeratosis congenita, is an 
autosomal dominant disease.67 It is caused by mutations in the TERF1 Interacting Nuclear Factor 2 (TINF2) gene, a component 
of the telomere-associated shelterin complex that protects against 
the shortening of telomeres.68 When telomeres shorten, cellular 
apoptosis leads to abnormal growth of the skin, bone marrow, 
and retinal vasculature.69 The disease is characterized by nail 
dystrophy, abnormal skin pigmentation, and oral leukoplakia.67 
The retinal findings are similar to those of exudative retinopathy 
and include peripheral avascularity of the retina, telangiectatic 
vessels, neovascularization, and tractional RDs.67,68,69,70 Excess 
subretinal fluid, intracranial calcifications, and brain abnormalities 
that lead to postural instability are important features that 
distinguish Revesz syndrome from other types of dyskeratosis 
congenita.67,68,71 The subretinal fluid is often diagnosed in small 
children because they present with leukocoria.69 Depending on 
the degree of retinal disease, severe vision loss and blindness 
may occur.70 Due to the extensive nature of Revesz syndrome, 
its diagnosis and management require a multidisciplinary 
team consisting primarily of pediatricians, ophthalmologists, 
hematologists, dermatologists, and neurologists.67,69,70,71 The 
management consists of treating specific symptoms. Ocular 
management includes laser photocoagulation to the avascular 
retina, intravitreal anti-VEGF for neovascularization, and pars 
plana vitrectomy for RDs.62,70 Life-long follow-up is required to 
monitor for systemic and ocular disease.69,70
Conclusions
To summarize, the most common cause of avascular peripheral 
retina is ROP . Although ophthalmoscopic features may overlap 
with other retinal vascular diseases, patients who develop ROP 
almost uniformly have prematurity and low birth weight. 
Furthermore, active neovascularization in late infancy, significant 
asymmetry, and family history of disease are not expected. In 
term babies or those with marked asymmetry, accompanying 
systemic findings, or a history of similar disease in close relatives, 
less common causes of similar clinical presentation should be 
considered in the differential diagnosis. Table 4 summarizes the 
key differentiating features of these causes. 55Özdek et al. Avascular Peripheral Retina in Infants 
Ethics
Peer-review: Externally and internally peer revieved.
Authorship Contributions
Concept: Ş.Ö., Design: Ş.Ö., E.Ö.Z., Data Collection or Processing: Ş.Ö., E.Ö.Z., Analysis or Interpretation: Ş.Ö., 
E.Ö.Z., Literature Search: Ş.Ö., E.Ö.Z., C.R.B., S.H., N.A.P ., 
A.M.B., A.L-C., H.A., S.K., F .M., S.J., D.L., S.A., Writing: Ş.Ö., 
E.Ö.Z., C.R.B., S.H., N.A.P ., A.M.B., A.L-C., H.A., S.K., F .M., 
S.J., D.L., S.A.Table 4. Key differentiating features of diseases presenting with avascular peripheral retina 
ROP• History of prematurity/low birth weight/neonatal oxygen therapy/no family history .
• Bilateral, may be slightly asymmetric.
• Typical features include avascular peripheral retina, straightening of the vascular arcades with macular and optic disc dragging, vascular 
proliferation in the form of ridge, tractional RD with concave configuration.
• Exudates are not expected in the typical disease stages.
• The course is usually progressive and follows distinct stages in a chronological order within the first few months of the life.
• Spontaneous regression or cicatrization is common.
FEVR• Mostly autosomal dominant inheritance.
• Family history is positive only in half of the cases. Examination of asymptomatic family members is helpful.
• Bilateral and often asymmetric.
• Typical features include avascular temporal peripheral retina, straightening of the arcade vessels with macular and optic disc dragging (ROP-like 
appearance but slower and with unpredictable progression), with or without retinal folds (falciform retinal folds extending mostly to the temporal 
periphery to the back of the lens).
• Straightening of the vessels is typical even in the absence of any visible traction.
• Pre-, intra-, or subretinal exudation is common.
• Association of posterior hyaloid yellow deposits is very unique for FEVR.
• Arrested vascularization does not show any forward movement into the avascular retina at any time point.
• RD is typically tractional, but may subsequently develop exudative and/or rhegmatogenous components.
•  FA is essential for accurate diagnosis and demonstrates peripheral nonperfusion, vessel straightening and anastomoses, telangiectasias, and 
neovascularization. There is usually irregular vascular sprouting beyond the transition zone, as opposed to the more homogenous and regular 
vascularization pattern at the ridge of ROP eyes. The foveal avascular zone is typically very small.
• Periods of disease inactivity and recurrences are typical throughout life.
Coats disease• Sporadic, unilateral (90%), male (80%).
• Pupillary reflex is more yellow than white (xanthocoria).
• Typical features include peripheral retinal telangiectasias, light bulb-shaped microaneurysms, abundant intra- and subretinal lipid exudates, 
subfoveal nodule, subretinal fibrosis, peripheral capillary non-perfusion areas on FA. 
• RD is typically exudative, with bullous elevation in advanced cases.
• Neovascular glaucoma with rubeosis iridis results in painful red eye in end-stage disease.
IP• X-linked dominant inheritance, seen mainly in females (lethal in males), mothers may have the same disease.
• Multisystemic disease – Neonatal skin lesions are typical (often transient and resolve spontaneously); dental hypoplasia, alopecia, and CNS 
involvement may be seen.
• Bilateral and often markedly asymmetric.
• Typical features include avascular peripheral retina leading to neovascularization, retinal hemorrhages, RD, and eventually retrolental fibrovascular 
mass.
• RD can be tractional or exudative.
• A blunted foveal pit, absence of normal parafoveal vasculature, and optic atrophy are commonly seen.
PFV• Mostly sporadic, unilateral (90%).
• Microphthalmos, microcornea.
• Typical features include prominent iris vessels, elongated ciliary processes, retrolental fibrovascular membrane, hyaloid stalk emanating from the 
disc (often with retinal folds and RD).
• RD is tractional and often tent-shaped, with attachment of the peripheral retina (seldom funnel-shaped RD) fibrotic attachment to the back of the 
lens is located more on the nasal side.
• Retrolental vessels are typically oriented in a radial pattern, and may anastomose with other vasculature in the iris, ciliary body, or circumlental 
space.
Norrie disease• Diagnosis at birth or within weeks of birth.
• Bilateral, symmetric, X-linked recessive inheritance, male.
• Mostly associated with progressive hearing loss and mental retardation.
• Microphthalmos, iris atrophy and synechiae, shallow anterior chamber.
• Severely dysplastic retina (often with severe subretinal hemorrhage and lipid).
• RD is often hemorrhagic and vascular lesions more prominent than PFV .
• Confirmation by molecular genetic testing.
ROP: Retinopathy of prematurity, RD: Retinal detachment, TVL: Tunica vasculosa lentis, PFV: Persistent fetal vasculature, FEVR: Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy, AD: Autosomal dominant, 
FA: Fluorescein angiography, IP: Incontinentia pigmenti, CNS: Central nervous systemTurk J Ophthalmol 53; 1: 202356Conflict of Interest: No conflict of interest was declared by 
the authors.
Financial Disclosure: The authors declared that this study 
received no financial support.
References
1. Spandau U, Kim SJ. Pediatric Retinal Vascular Diseases. 2019. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-030-13701-4
2. Michaelson IC. The mode of development of the vascular system of the retina 
with some observations on its significance for certain retinal diseases. Trans 
Ophthalmol Soc UK. 1948;68:137-180.
3. Flower RW , McLeod DS, Lutty GA, Goldberg B, Wajer SD. Postnatal retinal 
vascular development of the puppy . Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 1985;26:957-
968.
4. Smith LEH. Pathogenesis of retinopathy of prematurity . Semin Neonatol. 
2003;8:469-473. 
5. Chan-Ling T. Vasculogenesis and Angiogenesis in Formation of the Human 
Retinal Vasculature. In: Penn JS, ed. Retinal and Choroidal Angiogenesis. 1st 
ed. Springer; 2008:119-138. doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-6780-8_6
6. Hughes S, Yang H, Chan-Ling T. Vascularization of the human fetal retina: 
Roles of vasculogenesis and angiogenesis. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 
2000;41:1217-1228.
7. Lepore D, Ji MH, Quinn GE, Amorelli GM, Orazi L, Ricci D, Mercuri 
E. Functional and Morphologic Findings at Four Years After Intravitreal 
Bevacizumab or Laser for Type 1 ROP . Ophthalmic Surg Lasers Imaging 
Retina. 2020;51:180-186.
8. Chiang MF , Quinn GE, Fielder AR, Ostmo SR, Paul Chan RV , Berrocal A, 
Binenbaum G, Blair M, Peter Campbell J, Capone A Jr, Chen Y , Dai S, Ells 
A, Fleck BW , Good WV , Elizabeth Hartnett M, Holmstrom G, Kusaka S, 
Kychenthal A, Lepore D, Lorenz B, Martinez-Castellanos MA, Özdek Ş, 
Ademola-Popoola D, Reynolds JD, Shah PK, Shapiro M, Stahl A, Toth C, 
Vinekar A, Visser L, Wallace DK, Wu WC, Zhao P , Zin A. International 
Classification of Retinopathy of Prematurity, Third Edition. Ophthalmology . 
2021;128:51-68. 
9. Gilmour DF . Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy and related retinopathies. 
Eye (Lond). 2015;29:1-14. 
10. Ranchod TM, Ho LY , Drenser KA, Capone A Jr, Trese MT. Clinical 
presentation of familial exudative vitreoretinopathy . Ophthalmology . 
2011;118:2070-2075.
11. John VJ, McClintic JI, Hess DJ, Berrocal AM. Retinopathy of Prematurity 
Versus Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy: Report on Clinical 
and Angiographic Findings. Ophthalmic Surg Lasers Imaging Retina. 
2016;47:14-19.
12. Musada GR, Syed H, Jalali S, Chakrabarti S, Kaur I. Mutation spectrum of 
the FZD-4, TSPAN12 AND ZNF408 genes in Indian FEVR patients. BMC 
Ophthalmol. 2016;16:90.
13. Pendergast SD, Trese MT. Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy: Results of 
surgical management. Ophthalmology . 1998;105:1015-1023.
14. Kashani AH, Learned D, Nudleman E, Drenser KA, Capone A, Trese MT. 
High prevalence of peripheral retinal vascular anomalies in family members 
of patients with familial exudative vitreoretinopathy . Ophthalmology . 
2014;121:262-268.
15. Shukla D, Singh J, Sudheer G, Soman M, John RK, Ramasamy K, 
Perumalsamy N. Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (FEVR). Clinical profile 
and management. Indian J Ophthalmol. 2003;51:323-328.
16. Shields JA, Shields CL, Honavar SG, Demirci H. Clinical variations and 
complications of Coats disease in 150 cases: the 2000 Sanford Gifford 
Memorial Lecture Am J Ophthalmol. 2001;131:561-571. 
17. Shields CL, Udyaver S, Dalvin LA, Lim LS, Atalay HT, L Khoo CT, 
Mazloumi M, Shields JA. Coats disease in 351 eyes: Analysis of features and 
outcomes over 45 years (by decade) at a single center. Indian J Ophthalmol. 
2019;67:772-783. 
18. B Blair MP , Ulrich JN, Elizabeth Hartnett M, Shapiro MJ. Peripheral retinal 
nonperfusion in fellow eyes in coats disease. Retina. 2013;33:1694-1699.19. Kusaka S. Surgical management of coats disease. Asia Pac J Ophthalmol 
(Phila). 2018;7:156-159. 
20. Ucgul AY , Ozdek S, Ertop M, Atalay HT. External Drainage Alone Versus 
External Drainage With Vitrectomy in Advanced Coats Disease. Am J 
Ophthalmol. 2021;222:6-14.
21. He YG, Wang H, Zhao B, Lee J, Bahl D, McCluskey J. Elevated vascular 
endothelial growth factor level in Coats’ disease and possible therapeutic role 
of bevacizumab. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2010;248:1519-1521.
22. Mano F , Matsushita I, Kondo H, Utamura S, Kondo C, Kusaka S. Vitrectomy 
and external drainage of subretinal fluid containing high concentration 
of vascular endothelial growth factor for advanced coats disease. Sci Rep. 
2021;11:19333.
23. Cai X, Zhao P , Zhang Q, Jin H. Treatment of stage 3 Coats’ disease by 
endolaser photocoagulation via a two-port pars plana nonvitrectomy approach. 
Graefe’s Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2015;253:999-1004. 
24. Li AS, Capone A Jr, Trese MT, Sears JE, Kychenthal A, De la Huerta I, Ferrone 
PJ. Long-Term Outcomes of Total Exudative Retinal Detachments in Stage 
3B Coats Disease. Ophthalmology . 2018;125:887-893. 
25. Marques GF , Tonello CS, Sousa JM. Incontinentia pigmenti or Bloch-
Sulzberger syndrome: a rare X-linked genodermatosis. An Bras Dermatol. 
2014;89:486-489.
26. Ferrone PJ, Awner S. Proliferative retinopathies in children. in Pediatric 
Retina (2011). doi:10.1007/978-3-642-12041-1_15.
27. Lee TC, Chiang MF . Pediatric retinal vascular diseases. Retina 5th ed. 2012. 
doi:10.1016/B978-1-4557-0737-9.00061-8.
28. Buinauskiene J, Buinauskaite E, Valiukeviciene S. Incontinentia pigmenti 
(Bloch-Sulzberger syndrome) in neonates. Medicina (Kaunas). 2005;41:496-
499.
29. Pereira MA, Mesquita LA, Budel AR, Cabral CS, Feltrim Ade S. X-linked 
incontinentia pigmenti or Bloch-Sulzberger syndrome: a case report. An Bras 
Dermatol. 2010;85:372-375.
30. Minić  S, Trpinac D, Gabriel H, Gencik M, Obradović  M. Dental and oral 
anomalies in incontinentia pigmenti: a systematic review. Clin Oral Investig. 
2013;17:1-8.
31. Cammarata-Scalisi F , Fusco F , Ursini MV . Incontinentia Pigmenti. Actas 
Dermosifiliogr (Engl Ed). 2019;110:273-278.
32. Minić  S, Trpinac D, Obradović  M. Systematic review of central nervous system 
anomalies in incontinentia pigmenti. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2013;8:25.
33. Peng J, Zhang Q, Long X, Zhang J, Huang Q, Li Y , She K, Zhao P . 
Incontinentia pigmenti-associated ocular anomalies of paediatric incontinentia 
pigmenti patients in China. Acta Ophthalmol. 2019;97:265-272.
34. Narang S, Sindhu M, Jain S, Jinagal J. Retinal imaging in incontinentia 
pigmenti. Indian J Ophthalmol. 2019;67:944-945.
35. K Kim SJ, Yang J, Liu G, Huang D, Campbell JP . Optical Coherence 
Tomography Angiography and Ultra-Widefield Optical Coherence 
Tomography in a Child With Incontinentia Pigmenti. Ophthalmic Surg 
Lasers Imaging Retina. 2018;49:273-275.
36. Sen A, Shenoy P , Mitra A, Jain T. Multimodal retinal imaging of a 6-year-old 
male child with incontinentia pigmenti. Indian J Ophthalmol. 2019;67:942-
943.
37. Martínez-Gayosso A, García-Romero MT. Incontinentia pigmenti: 
multisistemic genodermatosis. Bol Med Hosp Infant Mex. 2020;77:112-118.
38. Chen C, Xiao H, Ding X. Persistent fetal vasculature. Asia Pac J Ophthalmol 
(Phila) 2019;8:86-95.
39. Prakhunhungsit S, Berrocal AM. Diagnostic and Management Strategies in 
Patients with Persistent Fetal Vasculature: Current Insights. Clin Ophthalmol. 
2020;14:4325-4335.
40. Jeng-Miller KW , Joseph A, Baumal CR. Fluorescein Angiography in 
Persistent Fetal Vasculature. Ophthalmology . 2017;124:455.
41. Laura DM, Staropoli PC, Patel NA, Yannuzzi NA, Nolan RP , Al-Khersan 
H, Fan KC, Flynn HW Jr, Acon D, Negron CI, Berrocal AM. Widefield 
Fluorescein Angiography in the Fellow Eyes of Patients with Presumed 
Unilateral Persistent Fetal Vasculature. Ophthalmol Retina. 2021;5:301-307.
42. Shen JH, Liu L, Wang NK, Hwang YS, Chen KJ, Chao AN, Lai CC, Chen 
TL, Wu WC. Fluorescein Angiography Findings In Unilateral Persistent Fetal 
Vasculature. Retina. 2020;40:572-580.57Özdek et al. Avascular Peripheral Retina in Infants 
43. Peripheral vascular abnormalities detected by fluorescein angiography in 
contralateral eyes of patients with persistent fetal vasculature. Ophthalmic 
Surg. 2020;51:506-511.
44. Staropoli PC, Yannuzzi NA, Patel NA, Negron CI, Prakhunhungsit S, 
Berrocal AM. Novel Frizzled-4 Mutation Is Associated With Familial 
Exudative Vitreoretinopathy Mimicking Persistent Fetal Vasculature. J 
Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus 2020;57:4-7.
45. Sisk RA, Berrocal AM, Feuer WJ, Murray TG. Visual and anatomic outcomes 
with or without surgery in persistent fetal vasculature. Ophthalmology . 
2010;117:2178-2183.
46. Zahavi A, Weinberger D, Snir M, Ron Y . Management of severe persistent 
fetal vasculature: case series and review of the literature. Int Ophthalmol. 
2019;39:579-587.
47. Ozdemir Zeydanli, E. & Ozdek, S. Surgical Results of Posterior Persistent 
Vasculature Syndrome. in Turkish Ophthalmological Association Virtual 
National Congress and Live Surgery Compound Meeting; (2020).
48. Bosjolie A, Ferrone P . Visual outcome in early vitrectomy for posterior 
persistent fetal vasculature associated with traction retinal detachment. 
Retina. 2015;35:570-576.
49. Sims KB. NDP-Related Retinopathies. GeneReviews; 1993.
50. Warburg M. Norrie’s disease. A congenital progressive oculo-acoustico-
cerebral degeneration. Acta Ophthalmol(Copenh). 1966;(Suppl 89):1-47.
51. Warburg M. Norrie’s disease--differential diagnosis and treatment. Acta 
Ophthalmol (Copenh). 1975;53:217-236.
52. Walsh MK, Drenser KA, Capone A Jr, Trese MT. Early vitrectomy effective 
for Norrie disease. Arch Ophthalmol. 2010;128:456-460.
53. Spandau UHM, Kim SJ. Pediatric Retinal Vascular Diseases. Springer 
International Publishing; 2019:15-18. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-13701-4_2
54. Duke JR. Pseudoglioma in children: Aspects of clinical and pathological 
diagnosis. South Med J. 1958;51:754-759.
55. Dickinson JL, Sale MM, Passmore A, FitzGerald LM, Wheatley CM, 
Burdon KP , Craig JE, Tengtrisorn S, Carden SM, Maclean H, Mackey DA. 
Mutations in the NDP gene: contribution to Norrie disease, familial exudative 
vitreoretinopathy and retinopathy of prematurity . Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 
2006;34:682-688.
56. Walsh MK, Drenser KA, Capone A Jr, Trese MT. Norrie disease vs familial 
exudative vitreoretinopathy . Arch Ophthalmol. 2011;129:819-820.
57. Walsh MK, Drenser KA, Capone A Jr, Trese MT. Early vitrectomy effective 
for bilateral combined anterior and posterior persistent fetal vasculature 
syndrome. Retina. 2010;30(4 Suppl):2-8.
58. Smith SE, Mullen TE, Graham D, Sims KB, Rehm HL. Norrie disease: 
extraocular clinical manifestations in 56 patients. Am J Med Genet A. 
2012;158:1909-1917.59. Halpin C, Owen G, Gutiérrez-Espeleta GA, Sims K, Rehm HL. Audiologic 
features of Norrie disease. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 2005;114:533-538.
60. Marlar RA, Montgomery RR, Broekmans A W . Report on the Diagnosis 
and Treatment of Homozygous Protein C Deficiency . Thromb Haemost. 
1989;61:529-531.
61. Ghassemi F , Abdi F , Esfahani M. Ophthalmic manifestations of congenital 
protein C deficiency: a case report and mini review. BMC Ophthalmol. 
2020;20:282.
62. T Taher NO, Ghaddaf AA, Al-Ghamdi SA, Homsi JJ, Al-Harbi BJ, Alomari 
LK, Almarzouki HS. Intravitreal Anti-vascular Endothelial Growth Factor 
Injection for Retinopathy of Prematurity: A Systematic Review and Meta-
Analysis. Front Med (Lausanne). 2022;9:884608.
63. Adams FH, Oliver CP . Hereditary deformities in man: Due to arrested 
development. J Hered. 1945;36:3-7.
64. Lehman A, Stittrich AB, Glusman G, Zong Z, Li H, Eydoux P , Senger C, 
Lyons C, Roach JC, Patel M. Diffuse angiopathy in Adams-Oliver syndrome 
associated with truncating DOCK6 mutations. Am J Med Genet A. 
2014;164:2656-2662.
65. Tan W , Palmby TR, Gavard J, Amornphimoltham P , Zheng Y , Gutkind 
JS. An essential role for Rac1 in endothelial cell function and vascular 
development. FASEB J. 2008;22:1829-1839.
66. Peralta-Calvo J, Pastora N, Casa-Ventura YG, Hernandez-Serrano R, 
Abelairas J. Peripheral ischemic retinopathy in Adams-Oliver syndrome. Arch 
Ophthalmol. 2012;130:1078-1080. 
67. Revesz T, Fletcher S, al-Gazali LI, DeBuse P . Bilateral retinopathy, aplastic 
anaemia, and central nervous system abnormalities: a new syndrome? J Med 
Genet. 1992;29:673-675.
68. Gupta MP , Talcott KE, Kim DY , Agarwal S, Mukai S. Retinal findings 
and a novel TINF2 mutation in Revesz syndrome: Clinical and molecular 
correlations with pediatric retinal vasculopathies. Ophthalmic Genet. 
2017;38:51-60.
69. McElnea EM, van der Spek N, Smith O, Fitzsimon S, Patel CK, O’Marcaigh 
A. Revesz syndrome masquerading as bilateral cicatricial retinopathy of 
prematurity . J AAPOS. 2013;17:634-636.
70. Asano M, Tsukamoto S, Sonoda KH, Kondo H. Revesz syndrome with 
bilateral retinal detachments successfully treated by pars plana vitrectomy . Am 
J Ophthalmol Case Rep. 2021;23:101137.
71. Riyaz A, Riyaz N, Jayakrishnan MP , Mohamed Shiras PT, Ajith Kumar VT, 
Ajith BS. Revesz syndrome. Indian J Pediatr. 2007;74:862-863.